course syllabus page 1 of 6 course information course number: csce 469 course title: computer architecture section: time: 02:20 pm-03:35 pm on tuesday and thursday location: 113 bright building credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: eun jung kim office: 215 peterson building phone: 845-3660 e-mail: ejkim@tamu.edu office hours : 03:35-4:00 pm on tuesday and thursday (zoom links on canvas) ta: sungkeun kim office: 261 peterson building email: ksungkeun84@tamu.edu office hours: monday 4:30-5:30, friday 1:00-2:00 (zoom links on canvas) course description reviews of von neumann architecture and its limitations; parallel computer structures and concurrent computation; pipeline computers and vectorization methods; array processors, multiprocessor architectures and programming; dataflow computers. course prerequisites csce 350 or csce312. an undergraduate computer engineering or computer science background is expected. special course designation no special designation course learning outcomes the main objective of this course is to provide an opportunity for students to learn about computer architecture with an emphasis on microprocessor microarchitecture. upon successful completion of the course, a student will be able to: • understand microarchitecture of modern computing systems • understand how software and hardware cooperate to run programs course syllabus page 2 of 6 • design hardware enhancements to improve the performance and analyze the performance of different implementations textbook and/or resource materials instructor will provide copies of lecture slides, and links to resources on the internet. textbook: computer architecture: a quantitative approach, sixth edition by john l. hennessy and david a. patterson grading policy grading scale standard letter grading scale: a = 90-100% b = 80-89% c = 70-79% d = 60-69% f = <60% the course consists of lectures, reading, homework, project and exams. the grade will be computed as follows: midterm 25 % final exam 25 % term project 25 % homework & class participation 25 % exams: the midterm examination will be held on monday, october 18 from 4:00-5:30 pm. the final examination will be held on monday, december 13 from 3:30–5:30 pm following the university schedule. the exams will cover all material up to that point, so you are responsible for mastering all homework material. all exams will be closed book and closed notes (unless otherwise stated). in the case of schedule conflict, please contact the instructor to arrange a makeup exam time. documentation will be required for any make-up exams, and must be arranged two weeks in advance. no last-minute accommodations will be made. assignments: homework will be assigned as lecture topics are completed. reading assignments will be assigned associated with lecture topics. assignments will be released on the canvas. the correct approach is to start working on assignments as early as possible and contact the instructor or ta when you encounter difficulties. in general, the closer to the deadline you request our assistance, the harder it may be to obtain our help. submission of work: all assignments deliverables must be submitted electronically, by the due date, through canvas (unless otherwise specified). late assignments are not going to be accepted in general, course syllabus page 3 of 6 unless a university sanctioned excuse is provided ahead of time. a student will earn points when he/she submits the assignment on time, by the partial credit policy. note that email submissions will not be accepted (they will be ignored without notice). you have to follow the submission and media policies and guidelines published on the web. re-grading policy: a student can request re-grading of assignments and exams, if he/she believes that the points assigned are inconsistent with the quality and merits of the submitted work. to request re-grading you have to follow the guidelines below. 1. regrading requests must be submitted at most one week after the item has been graded and returned to the student and solutions have been made public. after this time limit no re-grading requests will be honored. 2. re-grading requests must be as specific as possible and must be accompanied by a reasonable amount of justification and documentation. requests must be in written form for major assignments and exams. 3. e-mails must be sent to tas and graders or the instructor within the one week time limit. late work policy late work will not be accepted in general. turn in all work by the established deadline. in case you have difficulties finishing an assignment, contact the ta or the instructor before the deadline. late work can be accepted only under documented circumstances beyond the student's control and if possible by prior arrangement with the instructor. course schedule week topic readings for next time out in (due) 1-2 introduction & chap. 1/app.a chapter 1, appendix a hw1 3 app. c appendix c hw1 4 chap. 3 ilp- branch predictor chapter 3 hw2 5-6 chap. 3 ilp - scheduling chapter 3 7 chap.3 ilp-hardware speculation chapter 3 project proposalhw3 hw2 8 midterm, app.b appendix b hw3 9 chap. 2 memory basics/app.b chapter 2 hw4 proposal 10 chap. 2 memory optimization chapter 2 11 chap. 2 tlb/vitual memory chapter 2 12 chap. 4 simd chapter 4 hw4 13 chap. 4 simd-gpu chapter 4 hw5 14 chap. 5 tlp chapter 5 15 chap. 5 cache coherence chapter 5 hw5 16 final : dec. 13 3:30 – 5:30 p.m. term paper course syllabus page 4 of 6 optional course information items n/a 