syllabus cpsc 462, microcomputer systems 2022 fall instructor jyh-charn (steve) liu petr 435 tel: 845 -8739 email: liu@cse.tamu.edu office hours: by appointments , on-line teaching assistant s yu, yuncheng email: yyc@tamu.edu eaba 108b office hours: lab hours, other time by appointment learning objectives : develop independent and team design & implementation skills for microcomputer systems. special emphasis is plac ed on embedded computing systems. outcomes : at the end of this course you should • be able to formulate , plan an open project, and make a live demonstration of the project prototype ; • be able to analyze and choose microco ntroller technologies to meet func tional r equirements ; • be able to cross compile application codes , and be able to document the design process . course pre -requisites: csce 350 , or approval of instructor. course summary the main technical focus of this class is integrat ed development of software and hardware components into a system that can make use of sensors and actuators to perform real-time sensing and control functions . starting from the hands -on learning of development resources, constraints, and tools ; the class will guide studen ts to the next level of system design and implementation process in a combination of lectures and lab sessions. the lecture sessions will focus on selective design principles such as system modeling and abstraction , basic integration of components , and som e use cases . at completion of the lab exercises, students are organized into project teams for the term project. the class style is highly interactive and students are expected to eventually advance to a self-learning process to solve open project problem s, which are formulated by the teams and approved by the instructor . course outline sensing and timing digital power control address decoding interrupts and exceptions i/o fundamentals project use cases microcontroller kits instruments (scope, logic a nalyzer) course schedule to be discussed during the first day of the class based on a separate document. course requirements / grading scheme: tasks frequency weight test 1 1 20 points test 2 1 20 points labs 4 20 points open project 1 40 points (project work plan 10 points, proj ect progress ion 10 points, project outcome 20 points) more details at end of the syllabus grade scheme : final grades are ranked int o different grade letters. there is no hard numerical cutoff between grade letters. grade disputes may be appealed to the instructor in person. textbooks: none • all the major technical materials are drawn from the vendor datasheets and open lite rature published on various web pages. • lab manual – will be distributed with lab assignments, and available in lab and on the class web site. lab : see the “lab overview” document communications: canvas , which contain s the majority of the material with. e mails will be used for classroom communications. assignments & grading : no homew ork assignment test 1 and test 2 : closely follow the lectures, with pre -exam reviews. labs: for 4 labs, each lab is worth of 25% of the lab grade . standard lab turn -in requirements: 1. source codes, designs, annotation, following the report template 2. video recorded demo as a part of the lab report. the ta may ask you for in person demo if the video recording is not considered adequate for proper assessment. 3. if you fail to complete 3 labs, your lab grad ( 20 points) will become zero. and at discretion o f the instructor, you may receive an f grade. 4. two strike deduction: 20% final lab grade deduction. 5. tardiness: latest late submission friday of due week, with up to 2 5% of penal ty. open project: 40 points the open project includes the following major stages: 1. one pager : a project idea described in a single page. (0 point weight, a yes/no response ) 2. work plan : translate a chosen idea into an actionable plan, which will include a technic al specification, part list and budget. typically 5+ pages. (10 poi nts, rank -quality based ) 3. parts p rocurement : look at the source carefully. it sometimes takes 2 weeks to receive your parts , and some vendors do not refund or even accept part s return . you will be responsible for rush order shipping charge. 4. actions : activ ities will be tracked using canvas . (10 points, technical activity tracking & reporting on canvas ) 5. demonstration and final report submission . (20 points, rank -quality based ) report submission • lab reports: canvas • project reports at different stages (it is a progressive build up process ) a dual reporting system: canvas (to facilitate grading) and designated goog le shared folder s (to archi ve project wor ks for future c lasses) • one pager • work plan • final project o final report extended from the work plan o powerpoi nt presentation o short demo video clips o reimbursement paperwork • canvas project channels the canvas channels are used to track your activities. • project c ost reimbursement requests – separate forms, receipts, in emails 