course syllabus page 1 of 5 course information course number: csce 421 course title: machine learning section: 500 time: tuesday/thursday 11:10-12:25 location: zach 350 credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: dr. theodora chaspari e-mail: chaspari@tamu.edu office hours: tuesday, 12.30pm-1.30pm, peterson 326 teaching assistant/grader details teaching assistant: sheelabhadra dey e-mail: sheelabhadra@tamu.edu office hours: tbd grader: kangdong yuan e-mail: kky5082@tamu.edu course description machine learning is a sub-field of artificial intelligence that gives computers the ability to learn and/or act without being explicitly programmed. applications of machine learning have permeated many aspects of every-day life and can be found among others in self-driving cars, speech recognition, computer vision, and genomics. topics include supervised and unsupervised learning (including parametric and non-parametric models, clustering, dimensionality reduction, deep learning), optimization procedures, and statistical inference. course prerequisites students are expected to have knowledge on linear algebra (e.g., vectors, matrices, matrix-vector computations, vector and matrix norms, linear independence, matrix rank, singularity, positive definiteness, eigenvalues/eigenvectors, matrix decomposition, orthogonality), multivariate calculus (e.g., derivatives of univariate functions, derivatives of multivariate functions, chain rule, taylor expansion) and probabilities (e.g., discrete and continuous probability distributions, sum rule, product rule, marginal probability distributions, conditional probability distributions, joint probability distributions, independence and conditional independence, bayes theorem, variance and covariance, expectation). course syllabus page 2 of 5 special course designation none. course learning outcomes the objective of this course is to teach fundamental methods of machine learning with focus on the theoretical underpinnings, practical implementations, and experimentation. upon completion of the course students will: 1. have a good understanding of the fundamental issues and challenges of machine learning: data, model selection, model complexity, etc. 2. gain an understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of many popular machine learning approaches. 3. uncover the underlying mathematical relationships within and across machine learning algorithms and the paradigms of supervised and unsupervised learning. 4. be able to design and implement various machine learning algorithms in a range of real-world applications. textbook and/or resource materials - introduction to machine learning, 3rd edition, mit press by ethem alpaydin - learning from data, by yaser s. abu-mostafa, malik magdon-ismail, and hsuan-tien lin grading policy • assignments (5) – 40 points (1 point penalty on late submission per assignment) • quiz (5) – 15 points • participation in in-class activities – 5 points • exams (2) – 40 points • total – 100 points late work policy • late submission is accepted up to 1 week after the deadline with 1 point penalty (i.e., 1 out of 100 points will be subtracted). course syllabus page 3 of 5 course schedule week topic required reading 1 introduction alpaydin 1; abu-mostafa 1 2 linear algebra review; k-nearest neighbor alpaydin 8 homework 1 out 3 linear perceptron abu-mostafa 1 4 linear regression alpaydin 2; abu-mostafa 3 homework 1 due homework 2 out 5 non-linear regression coding and practice problems 6 logistic regression abu-mostafa 3 7 neural networks alpaydin 11 homework 2 due 8 neural networks homework 3 out midterm exam 9 deep learning alpaydin 13 10 decision trees and random forests alpaydin 9 homework 3 due 11 boosting & ensemble learning alpaydin 17 homework 4 out 12 unsupervised learning & dimensionality reduction alpaydin 6, 7 homework 4 due 13 special topics on trustworthy machine learning paper readings homework 5 out 14 revision & problem solving 15 homework 5 due final exam optional course information items not applicable. 