course syllabus page 1 of 6 course information course number: csce 412 course title: cloud computing section: 500 - 200 time: mw 4:10 – 5:35 pm location: 310 zachry engineering education complex credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: robert lightfoot office: 422 peterson building phone: 979 845 2611 e-mail: use the canvas email system for all class communications. office hours: monday & tuesday 11 - 12 noon course description operating system and distributed systems fields that form the basis of cloud comput ing such as virtualization, key -value storage solutions, group membership, failure detection, peer to peer systems, datacenter networking, resource management and scalability; popular frameworks such as mapreduce and hdfs and cases studies on failure deter mination. course prerequisites grade of c or better in csce 315. special course designation n/a course syllabus page 2 of 6 course learning outcomes at the conclusion of this course, students should be able to: • demonstrate understanding of the key research results that enabled the development of the cloud computing industry and being familiar with the standards in this new area; • demonstrate knowledge of the basic technology components that enable offerings su ch as amazon aws, microsoft azure, and openstack; • analyze cloud configuration offerings and assess fitness for specific application domains; • configure software stacks for cloud deployment and automate develop -deploy cycles; • identify weaknesses and st rengths of cloud offering configurations; • characterize expected performance, availability, and reliability of common multi -tier application when deployed on cloud platforms. textbook and/or resource materials we will use perusall for our reading this semester. this will allow discussion and questions about the content and server as a class library for documents we will read and discuss. you will link to perusall through canvas for all reading assignments. text book : cloud computing sehgal -bhatt second edition we will also reference nist cloud computing documents. grading policy ● grades are based on a weighted average. the letter grade will be assigned on the %total. o total >= 90 a o 80 <= total < 90 b o 70 <= total < 80 c o 60 <= total < 70 d o total < 60 f ● this course will allow you to show the achievement of the learning outcomes through the following methods: o exams 30% ▪ midterm 10% ▪ final 20% o quizzes 5% o discussions 5% o readings 15% ▪ perusall 10% ▪ knowledge checks 5% o projects 45% ▪ virtualization 10% ▪ load balancing 15% course syllabus page 3 of 6 ▪ s3 & ci/cd 20% o honors 20% ▪ participation, reading, teaching days. your project will be defined with you on the third week of class. ● for any inclass activity, you must be in class to participate or receive credit. this includes quizzes, discussions, and exams. ● for any submission for an assignment, the work must meet a minimum viable solution to the assignment. failure to submit this wi ll result in no attempt at grading or applying any rubric scores. you are required to develop your projects using a private repository at github.tamu.edu that you will share with instructor(s) and with grader(s). your repository is a documentation of you r development process. you are required to have clear commit messages that document the bugs you identified, corresponding fixes, addition of test cases, etc. your github usage will impact your grade. for example, having all the code added to the repositor y and submitted within a short period of time (the magic of going from no code to a working solution quickly) will result in a very low grade. late work policy class participation, quizzes, and reading are not accepted late. an assignment will be accept ed up to 24 hours after the deadline with a 30% penalty. ● late work will be accepted without penalty on the first class day after the university reopens after closing for an unexpected event. (the newest sars, snow day, hurricane day, etc.) ● late work will not be accepted for full credit for planned events. if you are part of a university sponsored event, have your work done prior to the due date. this includes interviews, conferences, etc. excused absences will normally not affect an assignment as most (e xcept exams) happen outside of class. if you have a university excused absence during an exam, we will follow student rule 7 . course schedule (major assignments) fall 2022 is a 15 week course. exams ● midterm october 5, 202 2 ● final december 12, 202 2 projects ● project -1 september 14, 202 2 ● project -2 october 13, 2022 ● project -3 december 7, 2022 honors ● tbd by ibm - october 18, 2021 course syllabus page 4 of 6 ● final reflection - december 7, 2022 