csce 482: senior capstone design course information course number: csce482 course title: senior capstone design credit hours: 3 section: 932 time: tue/thr 8:25 a.m. to 8:50 a.m. (lecture) tue/thr 8:55 a.m. to 11:25 a.m. (lab) location: eaba 118 instructor details instructor: dr. dylan shell office: petr 315 phone: (979) 845-2369 e-mail: dshell@tamu.edu office hours: walk-ins: wednesdays 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., also: by appointment. teaching assistant details ta: evelyn crowe e-mail: evelyn.crowe@tamu.edu office hours: available tue/thr 8:25 a.m. to 11:25 a.m. course webpage: http://robotics.cs.tamu.edu/dshell/cs4 82 course description this is a project-based course focusing on skills for system integration in order to solve real-world problems in computer science. it involves a significant team software project that integrates advanced concepts across computer science specializations, requiring the whole process from design, implementation, documentation and demonstration, as well as establishing a design methodology, management process and team management. emphasis is placed upon student's activities as design professionals. detailed description csce 482 is a project-oriented course aimed at developing system integration skills. students work in groups of 3-4 people to complete a significant software engineering design project. every project requires page 1 of 10 csce 482: senior capstone design complete implementation, documentation and demonstration of a software system, which may also involve minor hardware too. the focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, management process and teamwork. each team will be required to manage its own efforts to complete its project in a timely manner. group members will be required to keep individual lab notebooks recording their efforts and their personal impressions of the project. students will be graded based on both the quality of the group product and their individual contributions. every team will be required to schedule a weekly meeting with the course instructor and the ta, preferably during the official class or lab hours. these meetings must be attended by every group member. since the projects will be student managed, the exact nature and style of these meetings is at the group’s discretion. however, every member of the group is expected to participate. at the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentation describing and demonstrating their work. these presentations will be open to the university community and visitors from industry. course pre- and co-requisites students must have completed csce315, or an equivalent course. course objectives to prepare students for engineering practice with a major design experience based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work and incorporating standards and realistic constraints that include most of the following considerations: economic; environmental; sustainability; manufacturability; ethical; health and safety; social; and political. course learning outcomes it is expected that successful participation in the course will allow the student to demonstrate: ●an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering (3.a) ●an ability to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data (3.b) ●an ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs (3.c) ●an ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams (3.d) ●an ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems (3.e) ●an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility (3.f) ●an ability to communicate effectively (3.g) ●an ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice (3.k) textbook and/or resource materials required: patric m. lencioni, 2002, “the five dysfunctions of a team: a leadership fable” jossey-bass. (electronic copy available to all via the library.) page 2 of 10 csce 482: senior capstone design recommended: ralph ford and chris coulston, 2007, "design for electrical and computer engineers,” mcgraw- hill education. barry hyman, 2003, "fundamentals of engineering design," second edition, prentice hall. roger pressman, 2009, “software engineering: a practitioner's approach,” seventh edition, mcgraw-hill. james shore, 2007, “the art of agile development,” o'reilly (electronic copy available to all via the library.) grading policy the final grade you will receive in the class will be based on points accumulated during the semester. thus, both continued progress (the process) and the quality of your product (and other deliverables) will determine your grade. although the majority of your grade (65%) is based on the performance of your team, individual performance will also be evaluated. the grading scale is: oa90-100 ob80-89 oc70-79 od60-69 of59 or below 1. project proposal (15%) these points will be based on the originality, quality and feasibility of the proposed work, the analysis of alternative solutions, the consideration of economic and societal aspects, and the project management approach, as reflected on your written proposal (75%) and oral presentation (25%). a template for the proposal report and a presentation rubric are available on the course webpage. 2. weekly progress (10%) this grade will be based on your team’s ability to keep the project on schedule. the weekly report should be incremental, and should specifically address the following: 1. an agenda for the meeting with the instructor/ta 2. any major accomplishments during this time period, including figures and results 3. the team’s goals for the following week 4. an update on project management, including teamwork, purchases, schedule and milestone status 5. minutes of the previous meeting weekly progress reports are due 8 a.m. the day of the weekly meeting. the responsibility of preparing these reports will be rotated among team members. the team member preparing the report will also be page 3 of 10 csce 482: senior capstone design in charge of facilitating the discussions during that weekly meeting, and preparing an action list for the following week. 3. critical design review (10%) the cdr is a mid-semester evaluation of your project. the grade will be based on your progress to date, and the quality of your oral presentation and accompanying report. a template for the cdr report and presentation rubric will be available on the website. 4. final communication (10%) this grade will be based on the quality of the final presentation (25%), as well as the contents and professional finish of the documentation (75%). final reports should have a discussion of constraints that the team had to satisfy (e.g., cost, time, technology limitations) and of relevant industry standards used (e.g., coding, interfaces, safety). 5. project grade (20%) a final grade will be assigned to your project based on the completion of all the objectives stated in the proposal, as well as on a live demonstration. the complexity of your project and the size of your team will be factored in. due date: project demonstrations will take place the last day of class of the week prior to final presentations. this earlier deadline ensures that teams have time to (i) thoroughly test and validate their systems after the demo, and (ii) prepare the final presentation. 6. team work (5%) it is very important to understand that accomplishing the technical objectives of the project is not sufficient. these accomplishments should not come at the expense of destroying relationships among team members. thus, a grade will be assigned based on the ability of the group to function as a team. is there evidence that the group engaged in team building activities? were contributions to the project evenly distributed? were members equally engaged in discussions during meetings? was there an effective division of responsibilities. location: unlike some other capstone offerings, we do not insist on work being done in the lab; what matters is that the team worked cohesively. your group is expected to be present in the lab on the group’s respective meeting day (typically exclusively tuesday or thursday), as well as the presentation and cdr presentation days. 7. individual performance (30%) points in this category are based on assessment of your personal contribution to the project and team- effort: a) personal design and implementation contributions (10%) you are required record what you do as a member of the project. this can be done in virtual form, via software version control comments and notes/commentary on the log. a grade will be assigned to your personal contribution and logs of your design and implementation effort based on: i. the regularity of your entries throughout the semester. ii. the evidence of an engineering design process, including but not limited to page 4 of 10 csce 482: senior capstone design schematics, er diagrams, flow-charts, pseudo-code, tables of experimental results, and mathematical derivations. iii. the clarity, legibility and organization of your annotations and comentary. b) participation (10%) the instructor and ta will evaluate your attendance to meetings, participation in the discussions, and contributions to the team. team leaders will instead be evaluated by their ability to make the group operate as a team, i.e., item (6) above. c) peer review (10%) your performance will be evaluated by each of your team members throughout the semester. (dates appear in the table below.) furthermore, the instructor reserves the right to impose a grade penalty if a member is seen to actively undermine their group. note: grades will not be assigned until all project deliverables have been turned in (see below), all borrowed items (e.g., keys, books, equipment) have been returned to their proper location or their owner, and the the space in eaba 118 returned to state resembling its initial condition. all team members are required to be present at the time of the final delivery. final deliverables: 1. a bound hardcopy of the final documentation. 2. a usb key including the following (please organize into folders, e.g., docs, source, hardware (if applicable), media, references, freeware) a) designs: the final version of the code, documentation (apis, internal support document, user-guide, help files), data, freeware software tools, etc. b) reports: proposal, cdr, weekly reports, final report, and all presentations c) audiovisual media: a high-quality video demonstration of the system working. 3. final hardware prototype, if appropriate, as well as any spare parts and supplies. 4. software install, if appropriate, to be demonstrated on multiple machines. 5. the final peer reviews 6. evidence of individual design contributions document preparation all major documents (technical survey, proposal, cdr, and final documentation) should be submitted in a professional form. this includes being bound, containing a title page, an outline, as well as clear section and subsection headings, etc. students are strongly encouraged to submit documents typeset in latex. proofread and run a spell check before submission! (note the opportunities for extra-credit through use of the uwc, mentioned below.) 