csce 420: intro to ai syllabus course information course number: csce420 course title: introduction to artificial intelligence credit hours: 3 section: 500 time: tu/thu 2:20 p.m. to 3:35 p.m. location: zach 310 instructor details instructor: dr. dylan shell office: petr 315 phone: (979) 845-2369 e-mail: dshell@tamu.edu office hours: walk-ins: wednesdays 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., also: by appointment. teaching assistant details ta: jeff hykin [note: i’ve been told 25-aug-’22, this is subject to change] e-mail: jeff.hykin@tamu.edu office hours: fridays 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., and also by appointment too. course webpage: http://robotics.cs.tamu.edu/dshell/cs420 course description fundamental concepts and techniques of intelligent systems; representation and interpretation of knowledge on a computer; search strategies and control; active research areas and applications such as notational systems, natural language understanding, vision systems, planning algorithms, intelligent agents and expert systems. the course is a broad survey that will require a significant amount of reading with simple introductory programming in different languages. it will provide an understanding of the state of the practice of ai and set the foundation for further study in agency, logic, neural networks, robotics, uncertainty, and computer vision. course pre- and co-requisites a course dealing with design and analysis of algorithms, e.g., the class csce 411, or equivalent. page 1 of 7 csce 420: intro to ai syllabus course learning outcomes ●list the basic techniques for creating intelligent programs. this will be measured by tests/quizzes. ●create a successful program illustrating the operation of one of these methods. this will be measured by the programming assignments. ●apply the right programming language or technique to the right problem and be able to evaluate a proposed ai application for likelihood of success. this will be measured by programming assignments. ●be able to discern sensationalism from science on the possible impact of ai on society. this will be assessed by the final/communication project. textbook and/or resource materials artificial intelligence: a modern approach 3rd edition by stuart russell and peter norvig, 2009, or artificial intelligence: a modern approach 4th edition by stuart russell and peter norvig, 2020. grading policy ●the grading scale is: oa90-100 ob80-89 oc70-79 od60-69 of59 or below ●grades will be based on: o40%: programming assignments (individual) o30%: midterm exam (individual) o20%: communication project (group or individual) o10%: take-home final (individual) late work policy ●work is expected to be completed by the due date. occasionally the instructor will permit an extension to the deadlines, but those extensions will apply to every student equally. standard university reasons for lateness shall be respected so long as the student communicates with the instructor as soon as possible —this means, specifically, it has been communicated before the deadline has passed and not ex post facto. page 2 of 7 csce 420: intro to ai syllabus course schedule week-by-week topic breakdown weektopic core readings (from r&n 3rd; others will be posted) 1introduction, agents 1 & 2 2search 3 3local search, search for games 4 & 5 4constraint satisfaction 6 5knowledge representation 7 6 logic: foundations 8 7 logic: resolution-based inference/automated inference 9 8planning 10 9[midterm] 10learning basics 18.1-18.6 11neural networks 18.7 12reinforcement learning 21.1, 21.2 13philosophical foundations 26 important due dates: dateitem weight 27 oct.midterm exam 30% 22 nov.communication project 15% 8 dec.final exam [due date, this is a take home final] 10% page 3 of 7 csce 420: intro to ai syllabus programming assignments: the course will include five programming homeworks, which will be submitted for credit by the prescribed deadline. the assignments are not worth equal grade value and the effort needed will vary quite markedly. dateprogramming assignment weight (of the 40%) 22 sept.programming assignment 1: search 25% 6 oct.programming assignment 2: search for games 20% 3 nov.programming assignment 3: basic prolog 10% 29 nov.programming assignment 4: wumpus! 35% 6 dec.programming assignment 5: pddl 10% teaching technology/infrastructure: the lectures will be delivered in person. the class will make use mainly of material at the url mentioned above, and also a slack workspace (for persistent, threaded discussions which support code). some effort will be made to ensure that those who are unable to attend (owing to illness or quarantining) will be able to follow the progress of the course, and submit work. this will take the form of a courtesy offered by the instructor and is not intended to be a full “on-line” offering, rather it is merely enough to help reduce the stress and effort needed to catch up. university writing center the university writing center (uwc) is here to help you develop and refine the communication skills important to your success in college and beyond. the uwc provides this help in a welcoming atmosphere that respects all aggies' backgrounds and abilities. our trained peer consultants are available to work with you on any kind of writing or speaking project, including research papers, lab reports, application essays, or creative writing, and at any stage of your process, whether you're deciding on a topic or reviewing your final draft. you can also get help with public speaking, presentations, and group projects. we can work with you in person at our evans or blcc locations or via zoom or email. to schedule an appointment or to view our handouts, videos, or interactive learning modules, visit writingcenter.tamu.edu. if you have questions, need help making an appointment, or encounter difficulty accessing our services, call 979-458-1455 or email uwc@tamu.edu. page 4 of 7 csce 420: intro to ai syllabus for your communication project can obtain 5% extra-credit for each of these by providing evidence of having used the uwc to improve your draft. (for instance, showing a before and after, with evidence of their input.) 