csce 181 – introduction to computing fall 2022, section 599 location/time: online (zoom), tr 2:20 - 3:35pm class web page : https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/178285 teaching staff : instructor: dr. aakash tyagi office: petr -208 email: tyagi@cse.tamu.edu office hours: by appointment via e -mail graduate assistant: mr. debajoy mukherjee email: debajoym98@cse.tamu.edu course objectives: the objectives of this course are to inform students about the field of computer science and engineering, and to introduce them to the wide range of exciti ng applications of computation and technology in society. we will explain how computer science is not just about programming, but about computational thinking and the study of algorithms. important terms and concepts in the field will be introduced, as a p review to what will be learned in other courses. we will explain the motivation for various aspects of our majors, including the core course sequence in our curriculum, math requirements, supporting area, co -ops, etc. we will also discuss practical issues that are faced by software engineers (abstraction, ethics). in addition, invited speakers will give guest lectures on current topics which will be used to illustrate algorithmic ideas and give students an overview of different areas within computer scienc e. course structure : the course lecture content will be deployed in the form of seminar presentations associated with the stated objectives. student outcomes: at the completion of this course, students will be able to: • explain what computational thinking means, and how computation influences many aspects of our technological society. • explain how computer science is about algorithms, not just programming. • be fam iliar with important terms and concepts in the field. • understand the rationale for the sequence of courses required of our majors. • understand different aspects of being a software engineer. prerequisites: none grading: the grade for the course will be d etermined as follows: • attendance : 100% . there will be no exams and no makeup. • attendance will be recorded via a simple canvas quiz related to the meeting . • logistics: we expect to meet all the way leading up to the week before thanksgiving. this will amount to greate r than 20 meetings. you will be graded for 14 attendances thereby affording you some flexibility to pick and choose based on topics and contingencies. your numerical grade for this component will be based simply on the proportion of classes you attend. • final online canvas quiz on ethics to evaluate course outcomes for accreditation o this is different from the class attendance quizzes! o available after the ethics lecture o complete before the last day of semester classes o quiz grade will not matter for your grade, however failing to complete the quiz will result in loss of 3 attended lectures . • the expected grading scale will be a >= 90% > b >= 80% > c >= 70% > d >= 60% > f. o grade is calculated (rounded up ) based on 14 attendances. so, for exa mple, an a would require 14*9 = 12.6 or 13 attendances or more. optional textbook s: • understanding the digital world, brian w. kernighan, princeton university press, 2017. • networked life, mung chiang, cambridge university press, 2012. • great ideas in computer science, a gentle introduction, alan w. biermann, mit press, 1997 . 