csce 48 2 syllabus 1/9 syllabus course information course number: csce 482 , spring 202 2 course title: senior capstone design section: 931 time: monday and wednesday 11:35 am to 11:55 am lecture 12:00 to 2:30 pm lab location: eaba 118 credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: rabi mahapatra office: 217 petr phone: 979-845-5787 e-mail: rabi at tamu.edu website: https://codes.engr.tamu.edu/rabi/ office hours: monday and wednes day by appointment only ta: krishna c kushal e-mail: krishnakushal at tamu.edu office hours: by appointment course description engineering design; working as a design -team member, conceptual design methodology, design evaluations, total project planning and management techniques, design optimization, systems manufacturing costs considerations; emphasis placed upon student's activities as design professionals. csce 482(the capstone design program) consists of the design and implementation of a system (capstone design project) based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work with significant computer software. csce 482 is a project -oriented course aimed at developing system integration skills. students work in groups of 4 -5 people to complete a significant engineering design project. every pro ject requires complete implementation, documentation and demonstration of a software system, which may also involve minor hardware too. the focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, management process and teamwork. each team is required to manage its own efforts to complete its project in a timely manner. group members are required to keep individual lab notebooks recording their efforts and their personal impressions of the project. students are graded based on both the qual ity of the group product and their individual contributions. every team is required to schedule a weekly meeting with the course instructor and the tas, preferably csce 48 2 syllabus 2/9 during the official class or lab hours. these meetings must be attended by every group member. since the projects will be student managed, the exact nature and style of these meetings is at the group’s discretion. however, every member of the group is expe cted to participate. at the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentation describing and demonstrating their work. these presentations are open to the university community. course prerequisites senior classification; csce 315, csce 41 1, and two additional csce tracked courses. special course designation fulfills a writing/communication requirement for graduation. as a result , the aggregate score of the written reports must be a passing grade in order to get a grade in the course. course learning outcomes it is expected that successful participation in the course will allow the student to demonstrate: • an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering (3.a) • an ability to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data (3.b) • an ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs (3.c) • an ability to function on multi -disciplinary teams (3.d) • an ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineerin g problems (3.e) • an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility (3.f) • an ability to communicate effectively (3.g) • an ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice (3.k) moreover, co urse -specific outcomes are 1. understand and utilize the engineering design method to generate potential solutions to a specific design challenge; 2. understand the basic of project management including: statements of work, work break -down structures, critical p ath identification, distribution of tasks, project tracking and status reporting; be able to generate status reports; 3. understand professional communication methods and techniques including formal reports and presentations; 4. clearly communicate ideas, status and test results through written reports; 5. clearly communicate through oral presentations. 6. to rigorously define design requirements for potential solutions. 7. understand and incorporate engineering standards and multiple realistic constraints that include mo st of the following considerations: economic, environmental, sustainability, manufacturability, ethical, health and safety, social and political. textbook and/or resource materials required: patric m. lencioni, 2002, “the five dysfunctions of a team: a leadership fable” jossey -bass. (electronic copy available to all via the library.) csce 48 2 syllabus 3/9 recommended: ralph ford and chris coulston, 2007, "design for electrical and computer engineers,” mcgraw - hill educat ion. barry hyman, 2003, "fundamentals of engineering design," second edition, prentice hall. roger pressman, 2009, “software engineering: a practitioner's approach,” seventh edition, mcgraw -hill. james shore, 2007, “the art of agile development,” o'rei lly (electronic copy available to all via the library.) supplemental: technical material from the literature, manufacturer’s data sheets and user manuals. grading policy the final grade you will receive in the class will be based on points accumulated during the semester. thus, both continued progress (the process) and the quality of your product (and other deliverables) will determine your grade. although the bulk of your grade is based on the performance of your team, individual performance will als o be gauged. 1. project proposal (10%) : these points will be based on the originality, quality and feasibility of the proposed work, the analysis of alternative solutions, the consideration of economic and societal aspects, and the project management approach, as reflected on your written proposal (75%) and oral presentation (25%). a template for the proposal report and a presentation rubric are available on the course webpage. 2. weekly progress (10%) : this grade will be based on your team’s ability to maintain the project on schedule. each team submits a weekly report, which should be incremental and should specifically address the following: 1. agenda for the weekly meeting with the instructor and the ta 2. team’s accomplishments during this period. accomplishments need to be measurable, e.g. “did more research on such and such” is not an accomplishment, it is an activity (and a loosely defined one). 3. team’s goals for the following week (individual tasks are entered on basecamp) 4. minutes from t he previous meeting weekly progress reports are due at 8am on the day of the weekly meeting. reports are limited to one page and should be submitted according to the template provided in the course website. the team leader will be responsible for submit ting these reports and leading the discussion during the weekly meeting. one of the team members, acting as a scribe, will be responsible for generating the meeting minutes throughout the semester. 3. critical design review (10%) : the cdr is a mid -semester ev aluation of your project. the cdr grade will be based on the quality of your design (75%) –as reflected on your oral/poster presentation and written report, and on the degree to which you have a complete design (25%). a template for the cdr report and a p resentation rubric are available on the course webpage. 4. final communication (10%) : this grade will be based on the quality of the final presentation (25%), as well as the contents and professional finish of the documentation (75%). final reports should have a discussion of constraints that the team had to satisfy (e.g., cost, time, technology limitations) and csce 48 2 syllabus 4/9 of relevant industry standards used (e.g., coding, interfaces, safety). a template for the final report and a presentation rubric are available on t he course webpage. 5. project grade (20%) : a final grade will be assigned to your project based on the completion of all the objectives stated in the proposal, as well as on a live demonstration in front of the class. the complexity of your project and the size of your team will be factored in. due date: project demonstrations will take place the last day of class of the week prior to final presentations. this earlier deadline ensures that teams have time to (i) thoroughly test and validate their systems a fter the demo, and (ii) prepare the final presentation. 6. team work (10%) : it is very important to understand that accomplishing the technical objectives of the project is not sufficient. these accomplishments should not come at the expense of destroying relationships among team members. thus, a grade will be assigned based on the ability of the group to function as a team. is there evidence that the group engaged in team building activities? were contributions to the project evenly distributed? were membe rs equally engaged in discussions during meetings? was there an effective division of responsibilities? note: the work should be done primarily in the lab and as a group, regardless of whether you can perform your task assignments individually elsewhere . being physically present in the same room encourages collaboration and equal distribution of workload. a regular work schedule should be included in the proposal, showing the times when the team will meet in the lab to work on the project (in addition to meeting times). 7. individual performance (30%) : points in this category are awarded based on assessments of your personal contribution to the team efforts: a. notebook (10%): you are required to maintain an individual design notebook to collect any information relevant for the project, including ideas, references, designs, and discussions. your notebook will be graded based on: 1. the evidence of engineering design (e.g., sketches, block diagrams, schematics, pseudo -code, experimental results, formal d erivations), 2. the regularity of your entries during the semester, and 3. the organization of your notebook b. participation (10%): the instructor and tas will evaluate your attendance to meetings, participation in the discussions, and contributions to the team. each student is also required to pass a teamwork quiz with a score of 75 or higher (see tentative schedule); failure to do so will result in a 5% penalty on the final grade. c. peer review (10%): your performance will be evaluated by each of your team membe rs throughout the semester. peer reviews should be submitted to the ta no later than 8am of the due date. late submissions will not be accepted. note: grades will not be assigned until all project deliverables have been turned in (see below), all borrow ed items (e.g., keys, books, equipment) have been returned to their proper location or their owner, and the workstations in the lab have been thoroughly cleaned up. all team members are required to be present at the time of the final delivery. final del iverables • usb drive including the following (please organize into folders, e.g., docs, source, hardware, media, references, freeware, etc.) o it should include a plain text readme file that documents the list of contents. o designs: code, schematics, data, da ta sheets, freeware software tools, etc. csce 48 2 syllabus 5/9 o reports: proposal, cdr, weekly reports, final report, and all presentations o audiovisual media: close -up pictures of your system and a high -quality movie demo of the system working, for posterity (see gallery in the course webpage for movie samples) o individual notebooks (in digital form) • final prototype, as well as any spare parts and supplies • software install, to be demonstrated on several machines • peer reviews • evidence of individual design contributions final reports should have a discussion of constraints that the team had to satisfy (e.g., cost, time, technology limitations) and of relevant industry standards used (e.g., coding, interfaces, safety). document preparation all major documents (proposal, cdr, and final documentation) should contain a title page, an outline, as well as clear section and subsection headings, etc. please use the templates available in the course website. please run a spell check before submitting. cour se schedule week date classroom meeting materials due 1 1/19 kickoff lecture introduction 1/24 kickoff lecture resumes 2 1/26 kickoff lecture teams are formed 2/02 kickoff lecture 3 2/07 kickoff lecture teamwork quiz 2/09 kickoff lectur e 4 2/14 2/16 proposal presentations 5 2/21 proposal presentations proposal report, peer review 1 2/23 6 2/28 3/02 7 3/07 3/09 csce 48 2 syllabus 6/9 8 3/14 spring break 3/16 9 3/21 cdr presentations 3/23 cdr presentation cdr report, peer review 2 10 3/28 3/30 11 4/04 4/06 12 4/11 4/13 13 4/18 4/20 peer review 3 14 4/25 project demos 4/27 project demos 15 5/02 5/04 final presentations final report, and all deliverables optional course information items learning resources – the writing center is open and available to assist students this semester . they can provide assistance on the written reports that are due throughout the class (proposal, cdr, final report). more information can be found at https://writingcenter.tamu.edu/ 