syllabus course title and number csce 310 – database systems term spring 2022 meeting times and location monday & wednesday, 4:10 – 5:25 pm, zach 350 instructor informatio n name christopher i. g. lanclos telephone number n/a email address cilanclos @tamu.edu office hours monday & wednesday , https://doodle.com/mm/christopherlanclos/office -hours office location petr 111 course description and prerequisites file structures and access methods; database modeling, design and user interface; components of database management systems; information storage and retrieval, query languages, high -level language interface with database systems. prerequisites : csce 221 with a grade of c or better; junior or senior classification. learning outcomes & course objectives at the end of this class, the successful student w ill: • have a broad understanding of database concepts and database management system software • have a high -level understanding of major dbms components and their function • be able to model an application’s data requirements using conceptual modeling tools like er diagrams and design database schemas based on the conceptual model. • be able to write sql commands to create tables and indexes, insert/update/delete data, and query data in a relational dbms. • be able to program a data -intensive application us ing dbms apis. more specifically, • to demonstrate understanding of the relational model of data, you should be able to: o express queries using relational algebra o create tables using sql ddl o specify primary key and foreign key constraints in create table sta tements • to demonstrate understanding of query languages for databases, you should be able to: o use relational algebra operators including extended operators under both set and bag semantics o express queries using relational algebra • to demonstrate proficienc y in sql, you should be able to: o write single block sql queries o compose sql queries using set (and bag) operators o write sql queries with correlated subqueries o write sql aggregation queries involving group by and having clauses o translate a query in english to sql • to demonstrate understanding of data models, you should be able to: o use data modeling tools like entity -relationship diagrams o translate data models into relational table schema • to demonstrate understanding of data normalization, you should be able to: o find keys given a set of functional dependencies o identify tables that are not normalized o decompose unnormalized tables into bcnf and/or 3nf compliant tables • to demonstrate understanding of constraints, views, triggers, and indexes, you should be a ble to: o specify appropriate constraints o define and use views o define and use triggers o decide what indexes to create for a given workload • to demonstrate understanding of client server computing in the context of dbmss , you should be able to: o write a program that interacts with a dbms server via the jdbc api o design, develop and test a dbms -backed web application to address a problem textbook and/or resource material • textbook: database systems, the complete book, 2nd edition, hector garcia -molina, jeffrey d. ullman, and jennifer widom, prentice hall, 2009. isbn -13: 9780133002010 • supplementary textbook: database systems: design, implementation, & management , 13th edition, carlos coronel and steven morris , cengage learning, 2018. isbn: 9781337670562, 1337670561 • instructor will provide lecture videos, copies of lecture slides, and links to resources via canvas . grading policies the course grade will be assigned based on exams (25%), quizzes ( 25%), homework /discussion board (25%) and a project (25%). all homework , and project artifacts will be submitted by uploading them into canvas unless otherwise specified. late homework and project artifacts are accepted with 10% penalty for each day late up to a maximum of 3 days. (the pen alty will be waived for unexpected, excused absences in accordance with student rule 7.) quizzes and exams will be administered in person unless otherwise specified . students will be able to earn 50% of missed points on exams and quizzes, after attending office hours with instructor. 30 minutes per quizzes and 1 hour per exam. all quizzes prior to second exam will not be eligible for earning missed points back after second exam . exam points must be earned back prior to next exam, except for the third exam. ex. student a takes quiz 3 and scores 50 /100 on the quiz. the student can come to office hours and make up 50% of the 50 points that he did not obtain in the initi al quiz. grading scale standard letter grading scale: a = 100 -90% b = 8 9-80% c = 7 9-70% d = 6 9-60% f =< 59% attendance / make -up work policies attendance will be measured through quizzes and submission of assignments. the university views class attendance as the responsibility of an individual student. attendance is essential to complete the course successfully. university rules related to excuse d/unexcused absences and make -up work are located on -line at http://student -rules.tamu.edu/rule07 . major assignment and important dates assignment date last day to drop course 01/24 exam 1 02/16 spring break. 03/14 – 03/18 exam 2 03/22 reading day, no classes 04/15 last day for all students to drop courses with no penalty (q -drop). last day to officially withdraw from the university. 04/19 exam 3 04/27 wednesday. reading day, no classes. 05/04 final project presentations 05/02 & 02/06 