page 1 of 9 syllabus course information course number: vist 487/csce 443 course title: game development section: 500 time: tr 11:10am – 12:50pm location: langford c 109 credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: andre thomas office: langford c 104 phone: 979-845-3465 e-mail: manink@arch.tamu.edu office hours: by appointment teaching assistant: varda grover e-mail: varda_grover@tamu.edu course description aesthetic and technical aspects of computer game development, including game mechanics, story development, content creation and game programming; includes game design, interface design, 3d modeling and animation, graphics algorithms, shader programming and artificial intelligence; group project includes the design and development of a game from start to finish. during this course students will become familiar with the game development process as it applies in game development companies. the course is structured around the development of a core game, while many prototypes are being developed to prove out theories, assumptions, playability and fun factor. at the end of the course students will have created a playable demo. all work will be done in a group and students are expected to actively participate in all class activities, guests from industry may join on occasion to provide feedback and review progress. this course will try to simulate a real- world production environment; students should expect the u nexpected and be ready to deal with ambiguity, new challenges and difficult unforeseen problems, while working collaboratively and having fun. course prerequisites vist 486 or csce 441 or approval of instructor. cross -listed with csce 443. page 2 of 9 special cou rse designation none course learning outcomes 1. describe the game development process 2. understand the development process for game play, game mechanics and game ai 3. implement a variety of prototypes 4. create game content 5. differentiate between different testing schemes 6. critique different project management strategies textbook and/or resource materials handouts as provided remote engagement expectations (in case it is required) • students are engaged during the designated class time. this is not a self -paced course. • students will actively engage in discussion, online chats, polls, and other activities throughout the entire class session during all remote sessions. any activities conducted during class will count toward participation points. • all visible aspects of the s tudent require full clothing (e.g. shirts). • students’ faces will be visible. cameras turned on • in-class activities that result in participation points cannot be made -up. grading policy students enrolled in this course will be evaluated according to the following criteria: game development : 80% class participation: 2 0% 100% the instructor's qualitative judgment of the student's exercises, projects, and research will include such factors as preparation, conceptualization, technical application, documentation, and aesthetic effectiveness. the instructor's qualitative judgment of the student's in- class participation will include such factors as attendance, preparation, engagement, professional demeanor, and informed contribution to discussions and critique sessions. the development of the game is broken into 4 major milestones (m1, m2, m3, m4 - final) and will be graded as follows: m1 20%: - pitch deck : 25% - prototypes: 20% page 3 of 9 - meeting group -defined goals: 15% - progress presentation: 15% - final milestone demo: 5% - website: 10% - peer evaluation: 10% m2 20%: - prototypes: 45% - ui/ux mockups : 15% - progress presentation: 15% - final milestone demo: 5% - website: 10% - peer evaluation: 10% m3 20% - prototypes: 45% - art bible : 15% - progress presentation: 15% - final milestone demo: 5% - website: 10% - peer evaluation: 10% m4 40% - finished game /demo : 45% - publishing deck : 30% - final project presentation/demo: 5% - website: 10% - peer evaluation: 10% assignment grading practice as an aide to understanding the method by which your assignments are evaluated, read the following carefully. the actual grading criteria will be related to these categories but will be more specific to the given assignment. the scores noted below are relative to a 100 point assignment. f: 60 and below: the student work is unresolved; the intentions are unclear and major criteria or goals lack resolution; presentation is incomplete and/or of poor quality; there is a complete lack of problem solving intent, artistic content and/or visual merit. d: 60 - 69: the work has problems in two or more major areas; skill and problem development is marginal or incomplete; the project lacks imagination and/or design/artistic potential. c: 70 – 79: the student has completed the basic assignment, but the work lacks depth of understanding; some aspects are not completely satisfied and the work contains little promise even though most issues have been addressed. page 4 of 9 b: 80 – 89: the student work shows imagination and potential; presentation and visual content is good; the assignment requirements are fulfilled but in need of more refinement or development; the re are no major issues that would require a total redesign of the project. a: 90 – 100: the student work has imagination and the response to the assignment show understanding and thought; the work is highly developed and well presented; the entire project shows depth and breadth and is well coordinated; the project potential has been achieved. graded class participation as an aide to understanding the method by which your class participation is evaluated, read the following carefully. the actual grading criteria will be related to these categories but will be more specific to the given topic. the scores noted below are relative to a 100 point total. f: 60 and below: the student is consistently absent or significantly late to class; is rarely prepared fo r class; is rarely a willing participant or responsive to questions; consistently exhibits unprofessional and/or disruptive behavior; offers virtually no considered opinions, researched information, or constructive criticism. d: 60 - 69: the student is fr equently absent or significantly late to class; is only occasionally prepared for class; is only occasionally a willing participant or responsive to questions; frequently exhibits unprofessional and/or disruptive behavior; only infrequently offers considered opinions, researched information, and constructive criticism. c: 70 – 79: the student is occasionally absent or significantly late to class; is inconsistently prepared for class; is sometimes a willing participant and responsive to questions; infrequen tly exhibits unprofessional and/or disruptive behavior; inconsistently offers considered opinions, researched information, and constructive criticism. b: 80 – 89: the student is rarely absent or significantly late to class; is consistently prepared for class; is frequently a willing participant and responsive to questions; almost never exhibits unprofessional and/or disruptive behavior; usually offers considered opinions, researched information, and constructive criticism. a: 90 – 100: the student is never absent without excuse or significantly late to class; is always very well prepared for class; is always a willing participant and responsive to questions; never exhibits unprofessional and/or disruptive behavior; always offers considered opinions, researched information, and constructive criticism. final course grades will be assigned as follows, based on the weighted number of points earned as a percentage of total points possible: a 90% or above b 80% - 89% c 70% - 79% d 60% - 69% f less than 60% page 5 of 9 late work policy any assignment can be handed in after the deadline up until the last day of class. the late submission will receive a reduction of 10% of the grade. course schedule all classes will take place live in langford c 109 at the scheduled class time. week topic due dates 1 introduction to the course & game development framework 2 prototype development 3 game flow, look and feel m 1 4 game play 5 game play 6 game mechanics m 2 7 screen flow 8 screen development 9 game levels 10 interface & game systems m 3 11 game ai 12 game tech 13 game art 14 management – budget, schedule, risks 15 testing, localization m 4 course evaluations each student must complete on -line evaluations of the professor and the class. the link is: https://pica.tamu.edu – complete during the last week of class 