course syllabus page 1 of 5 course information course number: csce 222 course title: discrete structures for computing section: 599 time: mwf 01:50 pm – 02:40 pm location: online credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: qin huang office: petr 4 45 phone: 979-402-6216 e-mail: huangqin@tamu.edu office hours: will be posted on canvas course description provide mathematical foundations from discrete mathematics for analyzing computer algorithms, for both correctness and performance; introduction to models of computation, including finite state machines and turing machines . course prerequisites math 151 course learning outcomes the course will allow students to understand the relationships between logic, proofs and sets, and apply results from discrete mathematics to analysis of algorithms. students will be able to produce proofs and apply counting techniques. they will have a basic understanding of models of computation. textbook and/or resource materials discrete mathematics and its applications, 8 edition, kenneth h. rosen, mcgraw hill education. campuswire ( https://campuswire.com/p/gfd9b2b2c ): all questions will be fielded through campuswire. • everyone can see answers and other students can answer as well. • you may post to the entire class, or to instructors and tas only o email messages are more likely to be overlooked and should be used only in rare circumstances. join the course and use code 5442. course syllabus page 2 of 5 grading poli cy if you want to challenge any grading, you must do so within one week of when the grade is published. we reserve the right to audit the grades for any assignments submitted to this course. during the audit process, we can decrease or increase your score. this could result in lowering the score of already released grades. letter grades will be assigned as follows: 90-100 a 80-89 b or better 70-79 c or better 60-69 d or better <60 f or better exams (50%) • one midterm (20%). • final exam (30%). exams are open book, open note. • you are allowed o to use your textbook. o any instructor’s slides and examples. • you are not allowed o to interact with anyone face to face or electronically during an exam. homework (50%) written assignments are handed out every one or two weeks. a subset of each homework will be graded for correctness. the other problems will be graded for completeness only. the number of homework assignments is indeterminate (you cannot as sume there will be a certain number). • you must write your individual homework independently. • you are not allowed to interact with other students currently taking the course or those who have taken the course before. • you are allowed o to use your textbook. o any instructor’s slides and examples. o to get help from the grader and instructor. course syllabus page 3 of 5 late work policy submission of late assignments and scheduling of make -up exams should be arranged before the due date. course schedule week topic 1 logic and proofs 2 sets 3 functions 4 sequences and sums 5 algorithms and complexity 6 induction and recursion 7 counting 8 permutations and combinations 9 generalized permutations and combinations 10 recurrence relations 11 generating functions 12 inclusion -exclusion 13 relations 14 models of computation 