course syllabus page 1 of 6 course information course number: csce 314 course title: programming languages section: 500 time: mwf 12:40-1:30 p.m. location: hrbb 124 credit hours: 3 instructor details instructor: prof. dr. hyunyoung lee office: petr 419 phone: 979 845 2490 e-mail: hlee@cse.tamu.edu or hlee42@tamu.edu office hours: tuesdays 10:00-11:00 a.m. and thursdays 1:00-2:00 p.m. (or by appointment) office hour location: zoom (meeting id: 604-184-8110, logon using tamu account or via canvas) teaching assistant: ms. vedangi bengali office: zoom (meeting id: tba on canvas) e-mail: vedangibengali@tamu.edu office hours: tba on canvas course description this course explores the design space of programming languages via an in-depth study of two programming languages, one functional (haskell) and one object-oriented (java). it focuses on idiomatic uses of each language, and on features characteristic for each language. course prerequisites grade of c or better in csce 221, or concurrent enrollment; or approval of instructor. special course designation none. course learning outcomes at the end of the course, students will be able to use modern programming languages more effectively and be able to learn new programming languages more easily. they will get a broader understanding of language constructs, common abstraction mechanisms, and efficiency considerations. course syllabus page 2 of 6 textbook and/or resource materials required textbook 1: graham hutton, programming in haskell, 2nd ed., cambridge university press. isbn 978-1316626221. required textbook 2: ken arnold, james gosling, and david holmes, the java programming language, 4th ed., addison-wesley professional. isbn-13: 978-0-321-34980-4. course homepage: canvas course page https://canvas.tamu.edu. check the canvas course page daily. it is the student’s responsibility to be aware of the announcements, lecture schedule, and any assignments and their deadlines, and whether the assignment is held/submitted in-class or online. grading policy • graded items and their weights are as follows: o exams 60%: there will be two midterm exams each worth 20% and one comprehensive final exam also worth 20%. the exams are closed book and closed notes. o homework 20%: all homework assignments will be announced and posted on canvas. o quizzes 10%: your one lowest quiz grade will be dropped. o exercises 10%: there will be in-class activities and exercises. your one lowest exercise grade will be dropped. • final grades will be assigned according to this scale based on the weighted final average: a: 90 and above, b: [80, 90), c: [70, 80), d: [60, 70), f: below 60 the scale may be adjusted by the instructor to reflect score variations. attendance and make-up policy • class attendance is strongly recommended. if you miss class for any reason, it is your responsibility to find out what lecture contents/assignments/announcements you missed. • make-ups for homework assignments, quizzes, exercises, and exams will be given only under circumstances beyond student's control (a university sanctioned excuse). prior arrangements with the instructor must be made when feasible and official verification of circumstances necessitating the absence will be required. • any make-up work must be completed before the solutions are discussed or posted or the graded results become available to the students, whichever occurs first. please refer to student rule 7 for more information. submission of work and late work policy • all assignments (including exams, homework, quizzes, and exercises) must be submitted by the due date and time specified for the assignment. e-mail submissions will not be accepted (they will be ignored without notice). • in general, no late submission beyond the deadline will be accepted. partial credit will be given based on the work submitted by the deadline. course syllabus page 3 of 6 course conduct and