csce 221 s yllabus polsle y - spring 2022 course information course number:csce 221course title:data structures and algorithmssection:513-516credit hours:4space and time:lectureall sections:310 zachmwf12:40 pm - 1:30 pmlabs513:584 zachmw8:00 am - 8:50 am514:584 zachmw9:10 am - 10:00 am515:584 zachmw10:20 am - 11:10 am516:584 zachmw11:30 am - 12:20 pm instructor details instructor:seth polsleyoffice:eabc 112ce-mail:spolsley@tamu.eduoffice hours:in person:112 eabcmf2:00 pm - 3:30 pmonline:calendly.com/spolsleyby appointment teaching assistant:pedro figueiredoemail:pedrofigueiredo@tamu.eduoffice hours:online:calendly.com/pedrofigueiredoby appointment course description from the csce course catalog:specification and implementation of basic abstract data types and their associated algorithmsincluding stacks, queues, lists, sorting and selection, searching, graphs, and hashing; performancetradeoffs of different implementations and asymptotic analysis of running time and memory usage;includes the execution of student programs written in c++. data structures and algorithms is one of the core cs classes because it covers fundamentals of storingand processing data while introducing design and analysis of algorithms. many coding interviews,programming tests, and future classes will depend on material from this class. course prerequisites pre-requisit es: csce 121 (introduction to program design and concepts) orcsce 113 (intermediate programming & design) co-requisit es:csce 222 / ecen 222 (discrete structures for computing) ormath 302 (discrete mathematics) course learning outcomes this course details key concepts in computer science, aligning closely with the two tightly-integratedfields in the title: “data structures” and “algorithms.” accordingly, the content and expected outcomesare structured along these paths. by the end of this course, you should be able to: -describe basic abstract data types andassociated algorithms for lists, stacks,queues, trees, graphs, hash tables, andother similar structures. -apply big-o asymptotic notation toevaluate and select efficient algorithmsfor a given problem with respect totimeand memory usage. -define and analyze algorithmiccomplexity especially in regards to timeand memory efficiency -design and implement different datastructures according to resourcerequirements in the c++ programming language. textbook and resources textbookrecommended textbook:data structures and algorithm analysis in c++by markweiss, 4th ed. while this book is widely used in the field, there are many other c++ guidesand websites that you may find helpful to consult as well. canvascanvas will contain class materials, assignment descriptions, and grades. youcan access the course on canvas through your howdy portal. piazz a piazza will be used for q&a, announcements, and as a forum for other questions in the class. piazza ispreferred over email so that others can benefit from seeing the answers to your questions. you can alsoask private questions to the instructor and ta. you can self-enroll by visiting the link below and using thespecified access code if you wish; alternatively, you will be auto-enrolled by the end of the add/dropperiod. http://piazza.com/tamu/spring2022/csce221polsley(accesscode: 88266112) csce 221 syllabuspage2of7 mimirlab and programming assignments will be submitted through mimir. mimir is an auto-grading systemwhich can give you more direct feedback while allowing the instructor and ta flexibility to review manualportions of the assignments. you can self-enroll by visiting the link below and using the specified accesscode, or you may visit the direct enrollment link. alternatively, you will be auto-enrolled by the end ofthe add/drop period. https://class.mimir.io/courses/72895125-fa9c-4b89-9bb7-a906c41c2e6a/(access code: 4c322d38c7) mimir direct enrollment gradesc opesome assignments, such as quizzes and exams, will be graded on gradescope where there are betteroptions for submitting online and handling print exams than canvas. your account will be automaticallycreated, which you can activate through the sidebar in canvas under “gradescope”. https://www.gradescope.com/courses/353083 grading scale this class will use a standard a, b, c, etc. scale for final grades; depending on the distribution, a curvemay be applied. the instructor reserves the right to raise grades near a borderline to the next highestletter, based largely on the student’s perceived effort and participation. abcdf 90 - 100%80 - 89%70 - 79%60 - 69%< 60% componen ts descriptionpercentagecategory class participation5% 25% activitieslabs10% quizzes10% homeworks (4)10% 40% assignmentsprogramming assignments (5)30% exams (2)20% 35% examsfinal exam15% the class is primarily structured according to a formative approach, using a collection of activities worthcomparatively few points that accumulate over the course of the semester. in general, assume eachcomponent is individual, although certain activities, such as labs, will be designed for groups. csce 221 syllabuspage3of7 •activities:class participationconsists of in-class exercisesthat will be given as a means of quick assessment,feedback, and practice, while serving as a measure of attendance. lecture attendance is highlyrecommended, although not strictly required, but to provide flexibility, class participation is gradedout of 80%. you can miss up to 20% of these exercises before the overall 5% will be affected,enabling you to miss some lectures and to feel less concerned about individual activities. labswill be held on mondays and wednesdays beforelecture. they will test concepts throughapplied problems and be guided by the ta with the help of our grading platforms. unless specified,lab attendance will be required to earn lab credit. quizzeswill typically be short and held in-classabout once a week. following the goal of formativeassessment, individual quizzes are a low stakes way to evaluate concept understanding. the lowestquiz grade will be dropped, and it is possible to overwrite most quizzes scores with exam scores. forinstance, if the second exam score is higher than the average score for quizzes between exam 1 and2, those quiz scores will be replaced by the second exam score. •assignments:homeworksare take-home assignments that will notusually involve programming but will practiceconcepts related to the programming assignments and the overall course. programming assignmentscomprise the single largestportion of the course grade. these willrequire programming a solution to the given prompt and submitting your code and, if applicable,discussion of the results. assignments will be graded on a number of factors: algorithm design, useof data structures and user-defined types, quality of implementation, organization, correctness, andother artifacts of submission such as a written report including results. readability is also critical, soit is your responsibility to clearly comment your code. •exams:two regularexamsand onefinal examrepresent thesummative portion of the course. because thisis a foundational class for the field, exams will include conceptual and applied problems. policies •attendance:the university views class attendance as the responsibility of an individual student. attendance isimportant in this class as a means to keep current with the material, especially in labs, so studentsare encouraged to attend. lab attendance will be evaluated based on your being present in the laband submitting the lab work. class attendance will be based on in-class activities and quizzes. •absences and make-up work:university rules related to excused/unexcused absences and make-up work are located in studentrule 7:http://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07. ingeneral, you must notify the instructor at least aday prior to missing class, or within 2 days after if not possible, and provide documentation ofexcused absences within 3 days. make-up work for excused absences cannot be accepted more than30 days after the deadline. an unexcused absence on an exam will result in a zero. you may notify the instructor using the form located attx.ag/221absence. csce 221 syllabuspage4of7 •late submissions:typically, assignments are due at 11:59 pm on the day of the deadline. if an assignment accepts latework, submissions received after the deadline will be subject to a late penalty, which will becomputed based on the number of days late. the penalty will be 15% every day, up to 4 days. after4 days, late work will receive no credit. additionally, you have a pool of 4 late days that you can use to extend an assignment an additional24 hours without penalty. while the assignments are organized so that you have plenty of time tocomplete them, late days give you extra flexibility to handle unforeseen circumstances according toyour own judgement. to use a late day from your pool, you must fill out the following form:tx.ag/221lateday. be sure tospecify the affected assignment. you are responsible for tracking your own late days! we willmaintain this information and will only allow up to 4 to be used. •accommodations:the division of student affairs has made a new portal available,disability accommodation portal(aim), which you can use to request and send accommodationletters. please also visitcalendly.com/spolsleyto book an appointment withme. i want to make the class as accessible aspossible, and i would like to talk with you to discuss the best plan for meeting your needs. course schedule weektopic(s) 1introduction and review 2arrays, vectors, linked lists, stacks and queues 3searching and sorting 4algorithmic analysis 5trees 6exam 1 - friday, feb. 25 7heaps 8special trees 9hashing 10dictionaries and maps 11exam 2 - friday, apr. 8 12graphs 13shortest path 14spanning trees 15final exam - friday, may 6 csce 221 syllabuspage5of7 