syllabus cpsc 462, microcomputer systems 2022 spring instructor jyh-charn (steve) liu petr 435 tel: 845- 8739 email: liu@cse.tamu.edu office hours: by appointments teaching assistants yu, yuncheng email: yyc@tamu.edu eaba 108b office hours: lab hours, other time by appointment learning obj ectives : develop independent and team design skills for microcomputer systems. special emphasis is placed on embedded computing systems. outcomes : at the end of this course you should • be able to plan an open project, and be able to make a live demonstr ation of the prototype ; • be able to analyze and choose microco ntroller technologies to meet functional requirements ; • be able to cross compile application codes , and be able to document the design process . course pre -requisites: csce 350, or approval of i nstructor. course summary the main technical focus of this class is integrat ed development of software and hardware components into a system that can interact with sensors and actuators to perform real -time sensing and control functions. starting from th e hands -on learning of development resources, constraints, and tools ; the class will guide students to the next level of system design and implementation process in a few lab sessions. the lecture sessions will focus on selective design principles such as system modeling and abstraction , bus architectures, and basic integration of components. at completion of the lab exercises, students are organized into project teams for the term project. the class style is highly interactive and students are expected to eventually advance to a self -learning process to solve term project problems . course outline sensing and timing digital power control address decoding interrupts and exceptions i/o fundamentals parallel and serial i/o microcontroller kits instruments (scope, logic analyzer) course schedule to be discussed during the first day of the class based on a separate document. course requirements / grading scheme: tasks frequency weight test 1 1 20 points test 2 1 20 points labs 4 20 points open p roject (detail breakdown at end of syllabus) 1 40 points grade scheme : final grades are ranked into different grade letters. there is no hard numerical cutoff between letters. grade disputes may be appealed to the instructor in person. textbooks: none • all the major technical materials are drawn from the vendor datasheets and open literature published on various web pages. • lab manual – will be distributed with lab assignments, and available in lab and on the class web site. lab : see the “lab overview” document communications: canvas , which contain s the majority of the material with. emails will be used for classroom communications. assignments & grading : no homew ork assignment midterm and final: closely follow the lectures, with pre -exam reviews. labs: for 4 labs, each lab is worth of 25% of the lab grade . standard lab turn- in requirements: 1. source codes, designs, annotation, following the report template 2. live demo to ta’s 3. if you fail to complete 3 labs, your lab grad ( 20 points) will b ecome zero. and at discretion of the instructor, you may receive an f grade. 4. two strike deduction: 20% final lab grade deduction. 5. tardiness: latest late submission friday of due week, with up to 20% of penalty. open project: 40 points the open proje ct includes the following major stages: 1. one pager : a potential project idea to be described in a single page. 2. work plan: translate a chosen idea into an actionable plan , which will include a technical specification, part list and budget. typically 5+ pages. 3. procurement: it sometimes takes 2 weeks to receive your parts. you will be responsible for rush order shipping charge. 4. actions: activities will be tracked using canvas or an alternative medium like slack . 5. demonstration and final report submission. report submission • lab reports: canvas • final project reports ( it is a progressive build up process ) google shared folder s one pager work plan final report extended from the work plan powerpoint presentation short demo video clips • canvas project channels the c anvas channels are used to track your activities. • project cost reimbursement requests (optional) – separate forms, receipts, in emails covid 19 and us to help protect aggieland and stop the spread of covid-19, texas a&m university urges students to be vaccinated and to wear masks in classrooms and all other academic facilities on campus, including labs. doing so exemplifies the aggie core values of respect, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by putting community concerns above individual preferences. covid-19 vaccines and masking — regardless of vaccination status — have been shown to be safe and effective at reducing spread to others, infection, hospitalization, and death. 