s y l l ab u s course information course information course number: csce 399 course t itle: high-impact experience section: 500 time: n/a location: n/a credit hours: 0 instructor details instructor: richard furuta office: virtual phone: 979-845-3839 (leave message) e-mail: furuta@tamu.edu office hours: tba course description csce 399: high-impact learning. (0-0). credit 0. student participation in an approved high-impact learning practice; documentation and self-assessment of learning experience. course prerequisites junior or above status in csce special course designation none course learning outcomes the following student learning outcomes will be achieved on successful completion of this course: 1. students will be able to identify characteristics of their high-impact learning experience, such as (a) a deepened understanding of knowledge through purposeful tasks; (b) extended and substantive interactions with faculty and peers; (c) interactions with people who are dif ferent than themselves; (d) collaborative learning with frequent feedback; and (e) opportunities to apply knowledge in dif ferent settings. 2. students will be able to describe and discuss the impact of their high-impact learning experience on themselves. these outcomes will be observed and measured through the self-reflection assignment. textbook and/or resource materials none grading policy this course will be graded on a pass/fail (s/u) basis only . to achieve a passing grade, you must have an approved high-impact learning experience, and submit an acceptable self-reflection assignment as well as acceptable documentation by the designated due date. both reflection and documentation must be determined to be acceptable in order to receive an "s" grade in the class. the course instructor will determine whether any submission will count as “successful completion” or “incomplete.” submissions deemed “incomplete” will be returned to the student for revision and re-submission within 7 days. only 1 opportunity for revision will be given. a second submission deemed “incomplete” will result in a failing grade of “u.” and the student will be required to repeat the course. submissions deemed “incomplete” will be returned to the student for revision and re- submission within 7 days. only 1 opportunity for revision will be given. a second submission deemed “incomplete” will result in a failing grade of “u.” and the student will be required to repeat the course. late work policy course materials will be accepted until the last day of class without penalty . work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempted from the late work policy . (see student rule 7 (https://student- rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) ). course schedule the purpose of this course is to submit reflection and documentation about an already-completed experience satisfying the department of computer science and engineering's high impact experience requirement. see the department's statement of policy on what experiences meet this requirement, which is included in this course's materials. the reflection should be prepared using the form that is provided. the documentation should be a letter , email, or other material from the sponsor of the experience confirming the student's participation and successful completion (in the case of coursework-based experiences, a copy of the student's unof ficial transcript is suf ficient). although a due date is set on the assignments corresponding to the reflection and documentation, this is intended to be advisory . materials will be accepted through the end of the last day of classes without penalty . the assignments for the course are: documentation of activities performed in high-impact learning experience through submission on canvas. reflection/critical thinking assignment. the assignment encompasses a meaningful self- reflection piece that discusses the impact of the high-impact learning experience characteristics and the overall experience on the student’ s erudition. the format for this assignment will be provided on canvas. optional course information items 