course s yllabus csce 482-932, senior capstone designinstructor tracy hammond, ta adrita anika course ov ervieweffective design requires identifying the “right” problem to solve, building components that meet thatproblem’s needs, and integrating components into a single solution system. as problems become morechallenging, solid design, follow through, and teamwork skills become necessary to developing asolution. every computer scientist and computer engineer who wants to work on big problems musthave these skills. after this course, you will be able to: ●analyzea complex computing problem andidentifysolutionsusing computing principles, ●design, implement, and evaluatea computing-basedsolution to meet a given set of requirements, ●applycomputer science theory and software developmentfundamentals toproducecomputing-based solutions, ●collaborateeffectively as a member of a team, ●recognizeprofessional responsibilities, both legaland ethical, andmake informed judgementsincomputing practice, and ●communicateeffectively. you will work in groups of 4-5 people to complete a significant engineering design project. every projectrequires complete implementation, documentation, evaluation, and demonstration of a computingsystem design. the focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, managementprocess, and teamwork. at the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentationdescribing and demonstrating their work. this course offers you a unique learning experience. the ta and i are always especially excited to teachthis course, and here is why: ●you finally get to combine everything that you have learned throughout your entireundergraduate curriculum.this not only includes thecomputer science skills you have gained,but also the professional, cultural, and communication skills that you have developed. ●this is an opportunity for you to try to solve a problem that matters to you.this course givesyou a lot of freedom and choice in your semester-long project. this course can be the first steptowards moving to the career of your choice. ●building a system from start to finish is fun and rewarding.students often tell me that this wasthe greatest experience of their entire college career. ●working on teams can be messy, but it’s worth it.it is amazing what you can accomplishtogether, so much more than on your own. working on real problems with real people has itschallenges, but it is also very rewarding when you successfully complete your goals. ●every semester is different, every team is different, every solution is different.there is alwayssomething new to learn and innovate. ●smaller class sizes and weekly meetings allow you to connectwith your classmates and yourinstructor. page1of15 course s yllabus course expectations inclusion statementin this class, we are committed to a culture of inclusivity. we reject and condemn all forms of racism,discrimination, brutality, and violence. we actively promote diversity and inclusion within our field notlimited to race, ethnicity, religion, disability, age, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation. thus, we areunited in our condemnation of racism and any form of injustice. as martin luther king jr. said, “injusticeanywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” if any student wishes to discuss anything regardinginclusivity within the classroom, especially anything contrary to this statement that you haveexperienced, you are encouraged to contact the ta or instructor. we also endeavor to make the coursematerials themselves inclusive and accessible, and we encourage you to contact the ta or instructor ifyou have any concerns or questions regarding class materials. about working in teamsbecause your teammates' grades are so tightly coupled with your own dedication to the class, many ofthe assignments and rules are put in place to protect you and your teammates. these includerequirements to participate actively in class, complete assignments in a timely manner, keep the videoon with your face visible in virtual meetings, and treat your classmates and instructors with respect. csce 482 is a project-oriented course aimed at developing system integration skills. you will work ingroups of 4–5 people to complete a significant software design project. every project requires you tocomplete implementation, documentation, evaluation, and demonstration of a software system. thefocus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, management process, andteamwork. each team is required to accommodate the following: ●time management:manage its own efforts to completeits project in a timely manner. you aregraded based on both the quality of the group product and their individual contributions. ●scheduled meetings:schedule a weekly meeting withthe course instructor and the tas duringthe official class hours. these meetings must be attended by every group member. since theprojects will be student managed, the exact nature and style of these meetings is at the group’sdiscretion, e.g., division of tasks among group members.however, every member of the group is expected to participate in these meetings .at the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentation describing and demonstratingtheir work. these presentations are open to the university community. page2of15 course s yllabus online elementswe will use canvas for course materials, assignments, and communication. while most materials andassignments will be handled online, the class itself will be held in-person and synchronously, whichmeans you are required to be present and active during all classes and all class times. if remotelyattending for an approved reason, we will require attendees to have your video on with your face visible. attendance policystudents required to quarantine or self-isolate should still participate in courses and course-relatedactivities remotely and must not attend face-to-face course activities. students under quarantine orself-isolation are expected to participate in courses and complete graded work unless they havesymptoms that are too severe to participate in course activities. instructors teaching courses deliveredonly face-to-face should work closely with students who are in quarantine or self-isolation to ensure thestudent keeps up with the work. students experiencing personal injury or illness that is too severe for the student to attend class qualifyfor an excused absence (seestudent rule 7, section7.2.2). to receive an excused absence, studentsmust comply with the documentation and notification guidelines outlined in student rule 7. whilestudent rule 7, section 7.3.2.1, indicates a medical confirmation note from the student’s medicalprovider is preferred, please be understanding as not all illnesses may require a visit to a physician,especially during this time. ●importance of attendance:not attending weekly meetingsharms the other members of yourgroup and makes it much more difficult for the instructor to assess your contributions to thegroup effort. therefore, attendance, punctuality and active participation in the weekly meetingsare required. due to the unfortunate consequences and undue burden your frequent absenceswould have on the rest of the team,more than 5 unexcusedabsences is an automatic failure. ●video presence:if you are attending this class online,then you are required to have your videoshowing your face. just as it is not appropriate to attend a face-to-face class with a blanket overyour head, it is not appropriate to attend class with your video off. if you need to use a bio breakor step away briefly, you will need to communicate this with your team as long as an estimatewhen you will return. this class has a significant communication component, and facialexpressions are vital to communication. we understand that you may have a “bad hair day” orsome other reason that you will need to keep your video off, and those are completely fine. justnote thathaving your video off will count as oneof your unexcused absences. ●absence and tardiness:failure to attend a meetingor late arrivals (more than 10 minutes late)will be reflected in your individual grade. emergencies, however, do happen. lateness or absencecan be excused if there is a valid reason. illness, job interviews out of town, death in the family,conference attendance, inclement weather or accidents for commuters, etc., are valid reasons. ●valid excuses:oversleeping, a term paper due, anexam to cram for, etc., are not valid reasons.ultimately, the instructor reserves the right to determine what constitutes a “valid reason” on acase-by-case basis. ●proper planning:if you know you are going to be lateor miss a class, please let the instructor and your teammates know,so that they may plan foryour absence and make the best use oftheir time. page3of15 course s yllabus student expectations:you are expected to: ●always use your @tamu.edu e-mail account to send correspondence between yourself and theteaching team. check your @tamu.edu email account daily. ●use your canvas account (canvas.tamu.edu) to access course information, assignments, and yourgrades. ●be an active problem solver, contributor, and discussant in lecture and lab. ●be prepared and accountable for both lecture and lab by reading the assigned material ahead oftime and be able to answer simple questions over said material. ●be held accountable for all assigned material that is, or is not, explicitly discussed in class. ●have a public presence in the class. ●attend class as a community expectation. course logistics course time:11:30am–2:30 pm (lecture & lab) on tuesdays and thursdayslocation:eaba 121credit hours:3prerequisites:senior classification; csce 315, csce 411, and two additional csce trackedcourses. instructor:dr. tracy a. hammondoffice:eabc 103e-mail:hammond@tamu.eduoffice hours:in person after class and online by appointment tas:adrita anika and samantha j. rayoffice:eabc 112ce-mail:adrita:adrita.anika@tamu.edu; sam:sjr45@tamu.eduoffice hours:in person after class and online by appointment course descriptionsenior capstone design is a project-based course to develop system integration skills for solvingreal-world problems in computer science; a significant team software project that integrates advancedconcepts across computer science specializations; projects require design, implementation,documentation and demonstration, as well as design methodology, management process and teamwork. special designation: c (oral communication)as per university requirements: 1) at least 35% of your grade will involve written or oral communications,2) 70% of that 35% is based on individual (not group) writing or speaking, 3) at least 1250 words areindividually written, 4) feedback is provided to you to allow for revision of some amount of documentsor slides, 5) you have at least 5 minutes of individual public speaking.to receive c credit for this course, you must pass the c component. page4of15 course s yllabus course objectivesto prepare you for engineering practice with a major design experience based on the knowledge andskills acquired in earlier course work and incorporating engineering standards and realistic constraintsthat include most of the following considerations: economic; environmental; sustainability;manufacturability; ethical; health and safety; social; and political. expected outcomesit is expected that successful participation in the course will allow you to demonstrate:1.analyzea complex computing problem and toapplyprinciplesof computing and other relevantdisciplines to identify solutions.2.design, implement and evaluatea computing-based solutionto meet a given set of computingrequirements in the context of the program's discipline.3.communicateeffectively in a variety of professionalcontexts.4.recognizeprofessional responsibilities andmake informedjudgementsin computing practicebased on legal and ethical principles.5.collaborateeffectively as a member or leader of ateam engaged in activities appropriate to theprogram's discipline.6.applycomputer science theory and software developmentfundamentals toproducecomputing-based solutions. list of topics ●designing engineering problems ●using project management tools, e.g., gantt, trello, github, jira, etc. ●undergoing ethics training: citi ●writing project motivation and identifying needs ●conducting a literature review ●designing and communicating a user interface ●designing and running a user study ●analyzing and interpreting data ●communicating and summarizing results ●developing professional writing skills and writing technical reports textbook and/or resource materialsrequired:design of everyday things. don norman.(basicbooks 2013). available free online at tamulibraries.recommended: ●the five dysfunctions of a team: a leadership fable.patrick m. lencioni. (jossey-bass, 2002).available free online at tamu libraries. ●design for electrical and computer engineers. ralphford and chris coulston. (mcgraw-hillscience, 2007). physical copy available at tamu libraries. ●technical material from the literature, manufacturers’ data sheets and user manuals. page5of15 course s yllabus abet accreditationthe program is evaluated every year through the abet (accreditation board for engineering andtechnology) accreditation process. this class is part of the holistic evaluation. abet accreditationprovides assurance that a college or university program meets the quality standards of the profession forwhich that program prepares graduates. your degree is a significant achievement and perhaps the largestinvestment you will make toward your future. the quality of education you receive makes a bigdifference in your career success. abet accreditation: ●verifies that your educational experience meets the global standardfor technical education inyour profession. ●enhances your employment opportunities—multinationalcorporations require graduation froman accredited program. ●supports your entry to a technical professionthroughlicensure, registration andcertification—all of which often require graduation from an abet-accredited program as aminimum qualification. ●establishes your eligibilityfor many federal studentloans, grants, and/or scholarships. ●paves the way for you to work globally, because abetaccreditation is recognized worldwidethrough international agreements, and many other countries’ national accrediting systems arebased on the abet model. in order for the department of computer science & engineering to keep their accreditation, the studentsmust demonstrate their abilities in each of the above expected outcomes of this class. each of thoseskills will be evaluated by external industrial affiliate members during your final presentation. grading p olicythe final grade you will receive in the class will bebased on points accumulatedduring the semester.thus, both continued progress (the process) and the quality of your product (and other deliverables) willdetermine your grade. although the bulk of your grade is based on the performance of your team,individual performance will also be gauged. unless otherwise noted on the syllabus or class calendar, allassignments will be due before class on the due date. the following is the breakdown of the gradingpolicy. grade sc ale f < 60% ≤ d < 70% ≤ c < 80% ≤ b < 90% ≤ awe make every effort to provide you with the opportunity to earn an a. we do not curve in this class.rather, we teach to mastery which means that we have clear expectations in terms of what you shouldcomplete and what knowledge you should have obtained by the end of the course to succeed and toearn an a. if you are taking this class, participate appropriately, resubmit and fix your work based on ourfeedback, and work equitably with your team, you should get an a. you will have every opportunity toearn an a, so at the end of the course an 89.9 is a b. grade distribution1.daily quizzes:3% page6of15 course s yllabus 2.peer feedback:2%3.project proposal:5%4.weekly reports:5%5.reading responses:5%6.poster design and presentation: 10%7.auxiliary deliverables:5%8.project testing:5%9.irb materials:5%10.user study:5%11.final presentation:20%12.final deliverables:30%-----------------------------------------------total100%note that you will not receive a passing grade in the class if you do not have a tested working systemby the end of the semester. the lower weighted items will significantly help you succeed in yourhigher-weighted items. to repeat, while some of these sections might appear to have very low point values, they are crucial toyour later success in the higher point sections. 1. daily quizzes (3%)every class (including the first class) will start with a 10-minute quiz. the quizzes will include materialabout your assignments, questions about your design choices, and knowledge that you should havegained from your past computer science courses. research has repeatedly shown that the act ofquizzing imparts more knowledge than lecturing or studying. thus, this not only lets us know where yourknowledge might be lacking so that we may be able to correct it within this class, but it also serves toteach you the knowledge that you need to have. this course is your final course in your computerscience degree, and should provide you with the capability to put all of your skills together andcommunicate those capabilities effectively. 2. peer feedback (2%)peer feedback is crucial. it is also important that your feedback is of high quality. you will be asked to givefeedback to your peers regularly throughout the semester. this includes feedback on their presentations,their proposal ideas, and their written work. 3. project proposal (5%)initial individual proposal (1%), final individual proposal (1%), group proposal(3%)this grading criteria focus on formulating iterations of potential project ideas that will eventually lead toyour team’s final project idea for the rest of the semester. you individually and your team separately willuse the feedback from these proposals to help define that final project idea. during each of theseproposal phases, you will give feedback to your classmates to help refine the ideas and potentially findteammates with similar interests. page7of15 course s yllabus 4. weekly reports (5%)team updates (2%), individual updates (2%), agile project management (1%)this grading criteria will be based on your team’s ability to maintain the project on schedule. each team submits a weekly report as a group and individually, which should be incremental . the group reportsshould specifically address the following: ● minutes from the previous meeting agenda for the weekly meeting with the instructor and theta ●team’s accomplishments during this period. accomplishments need to be measurable, e.g., “didmore research on such and such” is not an accomplishment, it is an activity (and a looselydefined one). ● team’s goals for the following week both team and individual weekly reports are due at 11:59 pm on the monday of each week starting onweek 4. reports are limited to one page and should be submitted according to the template provided in the course website. the team leader will be responsible for submitting team reports and leading the discussion during the weekly meeting. one of the team members, acting as a scribe , will be responsiblefor generating the meeting minutes throughout the semester. 5. reading responses (5%)book readings (2%), literature review (3%): 10 breadth and 2 depth papers perteam memberthis grading criteria supplement your project team’s work by accumulating the knowledge necessary todesign and develop your system through book chapter readings from the design of everyday things bydon norman and from literature review readings related to your team project. each team member isexpected to identify 10 relevant papers for their project and specify how they should be referenced intheir final report. these papers will be different for each team member (so that a team of 4 will have 40papers to reference in their final report). of these papers, each person will read two of these papers thatare especially relevant in depth and write a reading summary on those two papers. this requirement isto ensure that you have a strong understanding of what relevant work exists. 6. poster design and presentation (10%) poster design & updates (5%), cdr midterm presentation (2%), external posterpresentations (3%)this grading criteria evaluate your team’s project progress in terms of its critical design in the mid-pointof the semester. your midterm presentation will serve as a critical design review for your project. yourteam will demonstrate this progress through a poster design and corresponding in-class discussion ofyour poster. your poster will receive feedback from your instructors and peers that you must address inorder to receive credit. additionally, at least one member of your team will present your poster at anexternal poster presentation, e.g., student research week, the aggie research expo, the tamu csce iapspring meeting, or similar, to provide you with extra practice in communicating your work andresponding to external feedback. page8of15 course s yllabus 7. auxiliary deliverables (5%)citi training (1%) gantt chart (1%), user stories (1%), references list: 50 papers(1%), github management (1%)this grading criteria focus on other assignment contents in the course that relate to your semesterprogress in preparing your team project. each team member is expected to commit to your githubrepository weekly, if not daily. 8. project testing (5%)your project must be evaluated in accordance with industry standards, so you need to test the technicalperformance of your developed materials as your project goes on. you are expected to develop anautomatic test bed for your project. you should also have appropriate unit testing throughout your code.this grading criteria evaluates the materials that you have taken, written, and conducted for preparingfor and executing the evaluation of your team project’s system. 9. irb materials (5%)irb supplementary documents (1%), initial irb application (2%), revised irbapplication (2%),in order to conduct an evaluation with human participants, e.g., a user study or a survey, you must havean active irb application with texas a&m. this process involves writing recruitment materials, anevaluation protocol, and a survey as well as any other materials as needed for your project’s evaluationplan. your team will prepare these evaluation materials throughout the semester, and must completethese contents properly and timely to ensure sufficient time in completing the evaluation of your system. 10. user study (5%)user studies (5%): at least 20 participantsthis grading criteria evaluates the materials that you have taken, written, and conducted for preparingfor and executing the evaluation of your team project’s system. your team will prepare these evaluationmaterials throughout the semester, and must complete these contents properly and timely to ensuresufficient time in completing the evaluation of your system. note that completing this a user study is partof the required final deliverables and it not optional, even if you prefer to abandon the 5% 11. final presentation (20%)oral presentation (15%), in-class demo (5%)this grading criteria evaluates the communication and demonstration of your team project’s systemthrough a presentation, which you will present to the instructors and to industry panelists on the readingday before finals; and a live system demonstration, which you will present to the instructors in class. 12. final deliverables (30%)final report (20%), documentation & coding (5%), demo video (5%)this grading criteria evaluates the technical writing of your final outcomes through the final report andthrough the document and coding of your system. your final report will be critiqued on its thoroughnessand effectiveness in communicating key aspects of your system such as its motivation, approach,evaluation, and engineering standard, while your documentation and coding will be critiqued on its page9of15 course s yllabus completeness to properly execute and understand the details of your system. the final deliverablesinclude: a) a video advertisement of your project, b) a live demo, c) a final updated poster, d) a finalupdated powerpoint slidedeck, e) fully documented code source, f) user manual, g) evaluation materials,and h) a final project report with all of the required sections. all final deliverables must be submitted inorder to receive a grade for this section. final deliverables1.team drive files including the following (please organize into folders, e.g., docs, source,hardware, media, references, freeware, etc.)a.designs: code, schematics, data, data sheets, freeware software tools, etc.b.reports: proposal, weekly reports, final report (completed in overleaf), and allpresentationsc. audiovisual media: close-up pictures of your system and a high-quality video presentingyour project (including a system demo and a project description) for posterity (seegallery in the course webpage for movie samples). final video must be submitted to theinstructord.presentation posters: in pdf and ppt formate.individual assignments: in pdf format2.final prototype in the assigned github repository, as well as any spare parts and supplies3.software install, to be demonstrated on several machines note : grades will not be assigned until all projectdeliverables have been turned in (see below), allborrowed items (e.g., keys, books, equipment) have been returned to their proper location or theirowner, and the workstations in the lab have been thoroughly cleaned up. all team members arerequired to be present at the time of the final delivery. all final deliverables are dueon the last day ofclass at 11:59 pm (date in canvas). 13. peer reviewseach member of your project team will score and review the performance of your other team membersthrough periodic peer review forms throughout the semester. your peer review responses will becalculated with the instructors’ internal scores for adjusting each member’s overall semester score.youmust complete all of your peer reviews to get an a in the course. 14. class participationthe instructors will evaluate your attendance to meetings, participation in the discussions, andcontributions to the team.more than five (5) unexcusedabsences will lead to an automatic failure forthe course. note that team days in which teams mayneed to work in a remote location to accomplishcertain assignments (e.g., presenting your work at a conference or srw, interviewing experts, meetingwith mentors, accessing technologies outside of the classroom, etc.) do not count toward absencesproviding they are approved by the instructor in advance, abide by the instructor’s requirements forcheck in during course time, abide by any activity reporting requirements by the instructor, andcomplete all assignments on-time relevant to that class time. page10of15 course s yllabus late work policyall assignments must be submitted to complete the course. assignments will be considered late aftertheir given deadline but will be accepted. late assignments will receive a grade reduction of 10% per daylate with a maximum reduction of 30%. purchases and reimbursements ●accurate forms:please ensure that purchase order(po) forms submitted to the department areaccurate. submitting a po with incomplete specifications or backordered items increases theworkload for our accounting staff and causes unnecessary delays to your team. submitting anincomplete po will result in the team being prevented from submitting additional pos; and alladditional purchases will have to be made by team members themselves and will be reimbursedat the end of the semester. ●in-stock items:please verify that items are in stockbefore submitting a po, and providealternative vendors if an item is likely to go out of stock (e.g., if the vendor only has a few unitsleft). if you suspect that a critical item may become backordered, it may be better if youpurchase it directly since pos may take several days to go through. ●reimbursements deadline:reimbursement requests aredue at the time of final deliverables. tominimize overhead on our accounting staff, we will only reimburse up to five purchase orders (ofyour choice); this policy also encourages teams to plan their purchases in advance. overnight orexpress delivery will not be reimbursed unless approved in advance by the instructor.reimbursement of sales taxes is not allowed by the university; please make sure to bringtax-exempt forms with you whenever you make local purchases (or purchases within the state). ●equipment return:the equipment and materials thatyou purchase do not belong to you, theybelong to texas a&m university. before you will be given a final grade in the course, allequipment and materials must be returned. course schedule as ac (communication)course, you will be continuouslytaught, and be given experience practicing, howto present their work professionally. this will occur during all of the weeks of the course. introduction to senior capstone design: weeks 1-3you will learn how to identify and formulate an engineering problem, how to function effectively onmulti-disciplinary teams, how to communicate and place their work in the context of other work, how tocommunicate the motivation, need, and ethical considerations for their system, and how to definesuccess in their projects. major deadlinesteams finalized bythe end of the second class meetingof week 2 (date in canvas).finalized project proposal dueat the beginning ofthe second class meeting of week 4 (date in canvas). page11of15 course s yllabus project design and skill development: weeks 4-6you will learn how to do project management, how to evaluate the success of their project, and how toeffectively evaluate their projects and create an evaluation plan according to their definition of success.you will complete a literature review, user stories, gantt charts, and paper prototypes. they will useproject management software such as github and trello. the groups and individual students will presentweekly updates on their project development progress. major deadlinessubmit irb applicationby the end of the second classmeeting of week 6 (date in canvas). project development: weeks 7-11the teams will learn how to communicate the user interface design and design choices and how to writetechnical documentation. the teams will continue to make progress on their projects. there willcontinue to be weekly reports, peer reviews, and in-class demonstrations. additionally, teams willcontinue to make iterative progress on their final reports. major deadlinesfully working systemby the end of the second classmeeting of week 11 (date in canvas). project evaluation: weeks 12-13the teams will run and implement a user study to evaluate the success of their system. they will learnhow to analyze and interpret data from an experiment and how to communicate about the results of anexperiment. the course will shift focus to the teams continuing to make progress on their projects. therewill continue to be weekly reports, peer reviews, and in-class demonstrations. additionally, teams willfinalize their final reports. major deadlinesfully evaluated systemby the end of the second classmeeting of week 13 (date in canvas). project finalization: week 14the teams will learn how to think critically about the results and their implications and how to effectivelysummarize their contribution. there will continue to be weekly reports, peer reviews, and in-classdemonstrations. additionally, teams will finish preparing all of their final deliverables (see below). major deadlinescomplete draft of their final deliverablesby theend of the second class meeting of week 14 (date incanvas). page12of15 course s yllabus project presentations: week 15senior projects will be presented to industry panelists. major deadlinesfinal deliverables due onthe last day of classby11:59pm (date in canvas)final presentations to iap members onfinal readingday (date in canvas). important dates:january 18 (tue.) –first day of spring semester classesjanuary 24 (mon.) –last day for adding/dropping coursesmarch 07 (mon.) –mid-semester grades duemarch 14-18 (mon.-fri.) –spring breakapril 15 (fri.) –reading day (no class)april 19 (tue.) –last day to drop classes (tamu q-drop)may 03 (tue.) –redefined day; attend friday classes (our class does not meet)may 04 (wed.) –industry panel presentations; reading day (no class)may 05-10 (thurs.-tues.) –final exams course cop yrig htthe materials used within this course are copyrighted. these materials include, but are not limited to,the syllabi, quizzes, exams, homework and labwork problems, online handouts, course videos, audio andvisual recordings of classes, etc. because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right tocopy or distribute these materials, unless permission is expressly granted.