page 1 of 7 syllabus course information course number: csce 420 course title: artificial intelligence section: 500 time: tr 3:55-5:10 location: 124 hrbb credit hours: 3 cr. course web page: https://people.engr.tamu.edu/ioerger/cs420 -spr22/index.html instructor details instructor: thomas r. ioerger office: 438 peterson building e-mail: ioerger@cs.tamu.edu course description fundamental concepts and techniques of intelligent systems; representation and interpretation of knowledge on a computer; search strategies and control; active research areas and applications such as notational system s, natural language understanding, vision systems, planning algorithms, intelligent agents and expert systems. course prerequisites csce 411 or approval of instructor special course designation none course learning outcomes list one or more learning outcomes for the course. a learning outcome is a statement regarding what the student will know or be able to do upon successfully completing the course. it must be both observable and measureable. the outcomes may include competencies developed in the course. additional assistanc e with learning outcomes is available through the center for teaching excellence and the office of institutional assessment . after completing this class, students should be able to do the following : 1. design and implement intelligent search methods for building complex problem -solving programs. page 2 of 7 1. formulate computational problems as search tasks 2. describe how various search algorithms work and explain differences in their space- and time -complexity 3. design heuristics to improve efficiency of search 2. use knowledge representation methods for adding knowledge -based reasoning in programs. 1. be able to encode rules and information in propositional and first -order logic 2. implement inferenc e algorithms to extract deductions from a knowledge base 3. represent and reason about uncertainty using bayesian probability 3. implement intelligent decision -making methods in a program 1. generate symbolic plans to achieve goals autonomously using planning algorithms 2. use utility theory to make decisions for intelligent agents textbook and/or resource materials russell, s. and norvig, p. (20 21). artificial intelligence: a modern approach. 4th edition. pearson . grading policy the overall score for the course will be a weighted combination of the following components: • 50% for 6 assignments (worth 5- 12% each) • 25% for exam i • 25% for exam ii (non -comprehensive) the final grade will be determined from the weighted -average total as follows: • a: 90- 100% • b: ≥ 80% and < 90% • c: ≥ 70% and <8 0% • d: ≥ 60% and <70% • f: < 6 0% grades will be posted on canvas. late work policy the penalty for late assignments is -5% per day ( pro-rated over 24 hours). late work is defined as submitting a deliverable after the established deadline. work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempted from the late work policy (see student rule 7 ). page 3 of 7 programming assignments in addition to 3 written homeworks, t here will be 3 programming assignments throughout the semester. the programming assignments will be done in c++ (individually). students are expected to be proficient in c++. the code for course projects will be submitted via github.tamu.edu. students will have to create a (private) repository for this class, and then share that with the instructor and ta by making them collaborators . the date and time studen ts turn in each project will be determined by the timestamp of their commits on their files. it is the student's responsibility to learn how to use git well enough to commit their code ( along with reports and other materials to required turn in) and push i t to the github.tamu.edu server by each deadline. course schedule week 1 overview of ai ; core concepts week 2 search algorithms (ch. 3) week 3 heuristic search (ch. 3) week 4 iterative improvement (ch. 4 ) week 5 adversarial (game) search (ch. 5) week 6 constraint satisfaction (ch. 6) week 7 propositional logic (ch. 7) week 8 inference algorithms (ch. 7) week 9 (spring break , mar 14 -18) week 10 first -order logic (ch. 8) week 11 inference in fol (ch. 9 ) week 12 prolog week 13 default reasoning and uncertainty (ch. 12 ,13.1) week 14 planning (ch. 11) week 15 intelligent agents (ch. 2) important dates: tues , jan 18, 2022 : first day of class tues , feb 22, 2022: assignment a1 due thurs, mar 3, 2022: exam i (in-class) thurs , apr 28, 2022 : exam ii (non -comprehensive, in-class) (last day of class) mon, may 9 assignment a6 due, 3:00pm (during finals week) optional course information items none 