CSCE 313 – Introduction to Computer Systems  
Spring  2022 
 
Course Logistics  
 
1. Time and Place  
a. Lecture s (Online -Asynchronous ): Canvas Modules  
b. Labs (In-Person) : Various  (Refer to HOWDY for your Section)  
2. Course Content: Canvas ( https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/137772 )   
3. Course Discussion Forum : MS TEAMS : TEAM - CSCE -313 SP22. 
4. Instructor : Aakash Tyagi, tyagi@cse.tamu.edu   
a. Office Hours :  Will be posted on Canvas  and TEAMS   
5. Teaching Staff:  
ROLE : Graduate TA’s and Undergraduate Peer Teachers will conduct the labs  and 
QnA . Undergraduate TA’s will work behind the scene on lab content creation  and QnA . 
Graders will take the frontline role in grading the programming assignments  and 
quiz/exams . 
a. Graduate TA’s  
i. Gabriel Stella  gabrielrstella@tamu.edu   
ii. Feras Khemakhem  foufou1560@tamu.edu   
iii. Mary Julian  mjulian@tamu.edu   
b. Undergraduate TA’s  
i. Ezekiel Blevins  ezeb209@tamu.edu   
ii. Sravan Sriram  ssravan360@tamu.edu   
c. Peer Teachers (listed on Peer Teachers Central Site ) 
6. A baseline R0 version of the Course Master Plan is made available on Canvas. Although 
some amount of buffer planning has been buil t-in to the schedule, we will respond to 
situation ‘on the ground’ and respond as dictated by the over -arching goal of maximizing 
learning and assimilation.  
 
Prerequisites  
• CSCE 312 (Computer Organization)  
• Familiarity  with C/C++ programming  (CSCE 121, CSCE  221)  
Description  
The objective of this course is to provide us with a general understanding of what system 
software is involved for an application program to run, both on a single node and over a 
network, and how this system software is to be used. In support of this  objective , the course 
will prepare us to do system -level programming. This course will demonstrate how to "use" 
(as opposed to "design") system components, such as memory, file systems, process control, 
inter -process communication, and networking. By the end of this course,  we will have an 
understanding o f the problems and pitfalls typically encountered in the design and 
implementation of multithreaded and networked applications and systems. More specifically, by the end of this course we should be fairly good  at making full use of the 
services provided by  the underlying operating system by programming directly at the 
operating system interface level. W e will review the following aspects of a computer system, 
in no particular order:  
• What is an operating system; what are its components ; why system calls?   
• Execution of a program; function calls; interrupts.  
• The OS application interface; file system; process control; etc.  
• Inter -process communication  
• Concurr ency, Threads, Process/Thread Synchronization  
• Network Socket Programming  
• Principles and practices for s ecure computing . Security threats in centralized and 
distributed systems; authentication, authorization, confidentiality; security 
mechanisms.  
• Parallel and Distributed Computing  
Books  (NOT REQUIRED FOR PURCHASE)  
There is no required textbook for this class : the course material is assembled from 
multiple sources (books, existing courses, conversation with experts, and published 
research). However, the following list of books are most referenced in the assembled 
material for those who’d like  an additiona l source of material to supplement lectures.  
• Primary  
o [OSPP ] Operating Systems: Principles and Practice, 2nd Edition, Thomas Anderson 
and Michael Dahlin, Recursive Books, 2014  (HERE ) 
o [OSTEP ] Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces. [Available online free HERE ] 
• Secondary  
o [APUE ] Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment, 3rd Edition, W. Richard 
Stevens and Stephen A. Rago, Addison -Wesley Pr ofessional Computing Series, 
2013.  
o [MOLAY ] Understanding Unix/Linux Programming : A Guide to Theory and 
Practice, Bruce Molay, Pearson Education Inc., 2003  
Other Interesting Reading s 
• Computer Systems  
o [CSAPP ] Computer Systems: A Programmer's Perspective , 3rd Edition, Randal E. 
Bryant and David R. O'Hallaron , Prentice Hall, 201 6.   
• Operating Systems  
o [OSC] Operating System Concepts , 10th Edition, Silberschatz, Galvin, Gagne, 
John Wile y and Sons, Inc.  2021  
Lectures  
Lectures will be remote -asynchronous  meaning the lecture content will be released on Canvas 
weekly according to the Master Schedule. Barring exception, effort will be made to release 
weekly content on the weekend in case you have discretionary time to read ahead.  During lectures we will be covering Operating Systems and Systems Programming concepts and case 
studies. The material covered in the lectures will provide the background and foundation for 
you to appreciate the lab exercises designed to buttress lecture concepts an d to prepare to 
succeed in programming assignments .  
Quizzes  
Quizzes will be ‘take -home’ format offered on Canvas , and aligned with key topic learnings. In 
most cases, quizzes will be online short format, multiple choice type of questions to test basic 
understanding of concepts presented during the lectures.  
Labs  
Labs will be held  in-person, face -2-face. Given the university requirements for the prescribed 
format of this course, the labs will NOT be conducted over Zoom  so if you are unable to be in 
College Station physically, you may  need to defer this course to a later semester. Labs are  
where we will pu t into practice the material learned in the lectures, and where we will acquire 
a working knowledge of the UNIX /LINUX  operating system . Labs  will meet twice weekly (TR 
for Sections 500 -507 and two back -2-back sessions on Friday for Sections 597-599)  where we 
will be presenting a new problem  to motivate learning and facilitat e skill-building . After an 
introductory session to familiarize you with the particular environment that we will be using, 
there will be a continuing series of lab exercise s and programming assignments of moderate 
difficulty level , which will exercise different parts of the operating system: process and thread 
management, inter -process communication, networked execution, and so on.   
 
There will be 6 Programming Assignments (PA 0-5) assigned roughly on a bi -weekly basis. We 
will kick -off the course with PA0 which is a simple, warm -up exercise in C++. The master -plan 
contains the details. Lab attendance is critical  to ensure you understand the problem, actively 
hash  the problem out with your classmates , and clarify with lab TA ’s and PT’s .  
Assessment Method (Subject to Minor Changes!) : 
The course will have two exams and a series of quizzes and programming assignments . The 
grade allocation is as follows:  
 
1. Exams  (Midte rm and Final ) = 40% (Midterm=22%, Final = 18%)  
2. Programming Assignments  = 54%  (each project is 9% of the grade)  
3. Online -take -home  Quizzes ( 20+) = 6% 
 
The grading scale is as follows:  
• 90-100: A 
• 80-89: B 
• 70 – 79: C 
• 60 – 69: D 
• 59 and below: F  
 
Late Submission Policy   – SUBJECT TO CHANGE   
 
Exam and Quiz late policies are stringent and fairly straightforward   
• Exams : No exception without prior e-mail approval  from the instructor . See 
University policy for details.  
• Quizzes : Online on Canvas.  Late submissions will not be accepted without prior e -
mail approval from the instructor.  
 
For the programming assignments, we are attempting something new for the late submission 
policy. Below , a general philosophy is presented.  
 
Philosophy : We all  have varying working habits - some start early, some wait till the last minute. 
We are also affected by our environment - last minute surprises can come, health, etc. In 
addition, this course is typically paired with CSCE -315 which is also project intensive. So, we are 
planning to adopt a policy that accommodates the unknowns to some extent  and also gives you 
the flexibility to respond to peaks and troughs in your enrolled course schedules : Early turnin 
wins credit, Late turnins earn penalty but can use earned c redits  to offset the penalty . In the 
end, the overall accrued credit/ penalty is applied on the sum total which is then scaled.  A 
separate document describing the policy in detail with examples will be made available on 
Canvas.  
 
Exams  
There will be one midt erm and one final examination. Both exams will be offered online on 
Canva s with required in -person attendance during designated lab session. Those with 
accommodations from the Department of Disability Resources  (LINK ) must arrange to take the 
exam at the center. Any exceptions to the above must be obtained from the instructor well in 
advance with proper justification via e -mail. The course master calendar will contain the  exam 
dates and they will also be communicated in TEAMS and Canvas well in advance.  
Communication Policy  
Your teaching staff  will do their best to communicate relevant administrative information 
(deadlines, information about posted material, details about projects, locations of 
tutorials, and so on) in an effective and timely manner. We will be using Microsoft TEAMS 
platform for all course communication.  
 
Please refer to the document “ CSCE313 How do I setup Microsoft TEAMS ” available on  
Canvas in Student R esources Module . It contains simple steps to install TEAMS and sign 
on to our course TEAMS site.  
 
At times, reinforcement messages may also be sent via Canvas, but our discussion forum 
is MS Teams. E-mails listed on course roster are used for enrollment in  Canvas and 
TEAMS . If you are not receiving TEAMS or CANVAS  updates, please contact the instructor.  
 
Teaching Staff Support  
 
It is important to lay out broad expectations for support as follows based on the roles:  
 Your instructor  will be on hand to answer queries on lectures and practice questions, 
offer mentoring, and conduct quiz/exam review sessions/support.  
 
Your TA’s will conduct labs  (graduate TA’s) , answer queries on PA’s, lab exercises, and lab 
quizzes, provide code qualit y feedback for PA submissions. Their time is best spent on 
providing clarifications on assignments and offer detailed feedback on coding quality and 
organization.  
 
Your graders  will not directly interface with you in labs but will work behind the scene in  
grading programming assignments, and quizzes/exams per discretion of your instructor.  
 
As a general policy, I am asking the TA’s to not assist  with debugging student code.  It is 
both counter -productive to student learning and extremely stressful for the t eaching 
staff.  They will expend much of the feedback in providing a clear understanding of the 
programming assignment expectations and common best practices.  
 
Course Acknowledgments  
 
Lecture Content : The course website and lecture notes have incorporated c ourse materials 
developed by Dr. Riccardo Bettati, Dr. Guofei Gu, Dr. Sarker Tanzir Ahmed, and Dr. Dmitri 
Loguinov of Texas A&M University, Dr. Avi Silberschatz (Yale), Dr. Lawrence Angrave (UIUC), 
Dr. Thomas Anderson (UW), Dr. Michael Dahlin (Google), Drs . Randall Bryant and David 
O’Hallaron of CMU, Drs. Anthony Joseph and David Culler of UC Berkeley, Dr. Kuenning 
(HMC), Dr. Snoeren (UCSD). The copyright of these materials belongs to them. The instructor 
is especially grateful to Drs. Bettati and Ahmed for  making their entire course content 
available for use in this semester offering, especially because the instructor is returning to 
teach this course after a nearly 4+year hiatus.  
 
Programming Assignment Content : PA’s have gone through evolution in the last  several years. 
Original programming assignments were created under the auspices of Professors Riccardo 
Bettati and Guofei Gu. The instructor (Tyagi) taught this course between 2014 -2016. During 
Spring  2016, a small number of enterprising undergraduate students took the daunting task of 
working with the instructor and (then TA) Prof. Sarker Tanzir Ahmed to create a new set of 
programming assignments in addition to revising the existing ones. The resulti ng set of 
programming assignments was piloted by Prof. Ahmed in his Fall 2016 CSCE -313 course and 
resulting student feedback was rolled in to the Spring 2017 offering, and improved ever since. 
The lion’s share of contributions was made by Andrew Kirfman an d Joshua Higginbotham, 
both former CSCE undergraduate students. Both the instructor and Prof. Ahmed are grateful 
for their contributions and honor their lasting legacy toward the benefit of the CSE student 
community.  
 
And finally, a note for the sake of ou r health and well -being: To help protect Aggieland and 
stop the spread of COVID -19, Texas A&M University urges students to be vaccinated and to 
wear masks in classrooms and all other academic facilities on campus, including labs.  Doing 
so exemplifies the Aggie Core Values of respect, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by putting community concerns above individual preferences. COVID -19 vaccines and masking — 
regardless of vaccination status — have been shown to be safe and effective at reducing 
spread to others, infection, hospitalization, and death.  
 
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. 
Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refe r to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason 
deemed appropriate by the instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of 
more than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed 
upon by the student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obli gation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work 
missed because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and 
Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
 
“Texas A&M University  students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an 
instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed 
the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inabilit y to 
authenticate one’s work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an 
academic misconduct case” ( Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic 
integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu .  
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below) 
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, 
physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability 
related needs with Disab ility Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or visit 
disability.tamu.edu . 
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits t o Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and 
productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based 
discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic 
violence, dating violence, and stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees 
(including full and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student worker s, etc.) are 
Mandatory Reporters and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, 
observes, or becomes aware of an incident that meets the following conditions (see Univers ity 
Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time 
of the incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the 
University.  
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their 
attention – including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or 
paper, class discussion, email, text, o r social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file 
a report, in most instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be able to 
control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The 
Univ ersity’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you and to 
ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an 
appointment with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).  
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the 
Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage .  
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that 
influence a student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged  to 
engage in healthy self -care by utilizing available resources and services on your campus  
 
Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS) or 
call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. w eekdays and 24 hours on 
weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention 
Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  