 SYLLABUS  
 
 
 
Course title and number  CSCE 310  – Database Systems  
Term  Spring  2022 
Meeting times and location  Monday & Wednesday, 4:10 – 5:25 PM, ZACH 350  
 
Instructor Informatio n 
Name  Christopher I. G. Lanclos  
Telephone number  N/A 
Email address  cilanclos @tamu.edu  
Office hours  Monday  & Wednesday , https://doodle.com/mm/christopherlanclos/office -hours   
Office location  PETR 111  
 
Course Description and Prerequisites  
File structures and access methods; database modeling, design and user interface; components of 
database management systems; information storage and retrieval, query languages, high -level 
language interface with database systems.  
Prerequisites : CSCE  221 with a grade of C or better; junior or senior classification.  
 
 
Learning Outcomes & Course Objectives  
At the end of this class, the successful student w ill: 
• have a broad understanding of database concepts and database management system software  
• have a high -level understanding of major DBMS components and their function  
• be able to model an application’s data requirements using conceptual modeling tools like ER 
diagrams and design database schemas based on the conceptual model.  
• be able to write SQL commands to create tables and indexes, insert/update/delete data, and 
query data in a relational DBMS.  
• be able to program a data -intensive application us ing DBMS APIs.  
More specifically,  
 
• To demonstrate understanding of the relational model of data, you should be able to:  
o express queries using relational algebra  
o create tables using SQL DDL  
o specify primary key and foreign key constraints in CREATE TABLE sta tements  
• To demonstrate understanding of query languages for databases, you should be able to:  
o use relational algebra operators including extended operators under both set and bag 
semantics  
o express queries using relational algebra  
• To demonstrate proficienc y in SQL, you should be able to:  
o write single block SQL queries  
o compose SQL queries using set (and bag) operators  
o write SQL queries with correlated subqueries  
o write SQL aggregation queries involving GROUP BY and HAVING clauses  
o translate a query in English to SQL  
• To demonstrate understanding of data Models, you should be able to:  
o use data modeling tools like Entity -Relationship Diagrams  
o translate data models into relational table schema  
• To demonstrate understanding of data normalization, you should be able to:  
o find keys given a set of functional dependencies  
o identify tables that are not normalized  
o decompose unnormalized tables into BCNF and/or 3NF compliant tables  
• To demonstrate understanding of constraints, views, triggers, and indexes, you should be a ble 
to: 
o specify appropriate constraints  
o define and use views  
o define and use triggers  
o decide what indexes to create for a given workload  
• To demonstrate understanding of client server computing in the context of DBMSs , you should 
be able to:  
o write a program that interacts with a DBMS server  via the JDBC API  
o design, develop and test a DBMS -backed web application to address a problem  
 
Textbook and/or Resource Material  
• Textbook: Database Systems, The Complete Book, 2nd  Edition, Hector Garcia -Molina, Jeffrey D. 
Ullman, and Jennifer  Widom, Prentice Hall, 2009.  ISBN -13: 9780133002010  
• Supplementary  Textbook:  Database Systems: Design, Implementation, & Management , 13th 
Edition, Carlos Coronel  and Steven Morris , Cengage Learning, 2018.  ISBN:  9781337670562, 
1337670561  
• Instructor will provide lecture videos, copies of lecture slides, and links to resources via Canvas . 
 
Grading Policies  
The course grade will be assigned based on  exams (25%),  quizzes ( 25%), homework /discussion 
Board  (25%) and a project (25%).  
 
All homework , and project artifacts  will be submitted by uploading them into Canvas unless 
otherwise specified.  Late homework  and project artifacts  are accepted with 10% penalty for each 
day late up to a maximum of 3 days. (The pen alty will be waived for unexpected, excused 
absences in accordance with Student Rule 7.)  
 
Quizzes and exams will be administered in person unless otherwise specified . 
 
Students will be able to earn 50% of missed points on exams and quizzes, after attending office 
hours with instructor. 30 minutes per quizzes and 1 hour per exam.  All quizzes prior to second 
exam will not be eligible for earning missed points back after  second  exam . Exam  points must be 
earned back  prior to next exam, except for  the third exam.  
 
Ex. Student A takes quiz 3 and scores 50 /100  on the quiz. The student can come to office hours 
and make up 50% of the 50 points that he did not obtain in the initi al quiz.  
 
 Grading Scale  
Standard Letter Grading Scale:  
A = 100 -90%   B = 8 9-80%   C = 7 9-70%   D = 6 9-60%   F =<  59% 
 
Attendance / Make -up Work Policies  
Attendance will be measured through quizzes and submission of assignments. The University 
views class attendance as the responsibility of an individual student. Attendance is essential to 
complete the course successfully. University rules related to excuse d/unexcused absences 
and make -up work are located on -line at http://student -rules.tamu.edu/rule07 . 
 
Major Assignment  and Important  Dates  
Assignment   Date  
Last Day to Drop Course  01/24 
Exam 1  02/16  
Spring break.  03/14 – 03/18  
Exam 2  03/22  
Reading Day, No Classes  04/15  
Last day for all students to drop courses with no penalty (Q -drop).  
Last day to officially withdraw from the University.  04/19 
Exam 3  04/27 
Wednesday. Reading day, no classes.  05/04 
Final Project Presentations  05/02 & 02/06  
 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)  
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for 
all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may 
have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources 
listed below).  Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss 
their disability related needs with Dis ability Resources and their instructor as soon as possible.  
 
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or visit 
disability.tamu.edu . 
 
 
Academic Integrity  
For additional information please visit: http://aggiehonor.tamu.edu   
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat, or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
 
 
 