 
Page 1 of 5 
 Syllabus  CSCE 411 /629  
 
 
Course Information  
 
Course Number s:  CSCE 411 -503, CSCE 629 -603 (Klappenecker)  
Course Title s:  Design and Analysis of Algorithms , Analysis of Algorithms    
Time:  TR 11:10  am – 12:25 pm  
Location:   Zach 3 10  
  
Credit Hours:  3  
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:   Andreas Klappenecker   
Office:   PETR 418     
E-Mail:   klappi  at cse.tamu.edu   
Office Hours:   WR 10:30 am – 11:30 am or by appointment, office hours will be held on zoom  
 
Teaching Assistant:  Andrew Nemec  
Office:  zoom  
E-Mail:  nemeca at cse.tamu.edu  
Office Hours:  WF 1: 30pm – 3:30pm, office hours will be held on zoom  
  
Course Description  
 
The course focuses on the study of computer algorithms, in particular  design paradigm s of algorithms,  
the analysis of time and space  requirements of algorithms, and the correctness of  algorithms.  
Furthermore, the course studies NP -completeness and  undecidability.  
 
Course Prerequisites  
 
CSCE 221 and CSCE 222  
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
 
At the end of the semester, you should:  
- be familiar with fundamental algorithms and algorithmic techniques;  
- given a particular application, be able to decide which algorithm  is most suitable  among a 
set of choices ;  
- be able to prove correctness and analyze running time and space complexity of a given 
algorithm;  
- be able to design efficient algorithms for new situations using the techniques learned ; 
- be able to prove that a problem is NP -complete using reduction and understand the 
implic ations;  
- understand the notion of undecidability, know that some problems are undecidable, and 
comprehend the implications.   
Page 2 of 5 
 Textbook and Resource Materials  
 
Required textbook : Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, Stein: Introduction to Algorithms , 3rd edition, The MI T 
Press, 2009.   
Resou rces: https://canvas.tamu.edu/  (check daily for updates)  
 
Grading Policy  
 
Your grade will be based on the following components:  
- exams 60%: There will be one midterm exam and one comprehensive final exam each worth 30%.  
The exams will be given in class.   
- quizzes and exercises 10%: There will be online quizzes and exercises, each consisting of a few 
simple questions. Your lowest grade in this component will be dropped.  
- homework 30% : These are essay style assignments, for which you  are required to use the  LaTeX  
typesetting system to type in your  answers. All assignments  can be found in canvas .  Your lowest 
homework grade will be dropped.  
 
Final grades will be assigned according to th is scale:  
A: 90 and above, B: [80,90), C: [70,80), D: [60,70), F: below 60  
A slight curve might be applied if the course average is low.  
 
Late Work Policy  
 
• All assignments must be submitted on canvas . 
• No late submissions will be accepted.  
• E-mail submissions will not be accepted and will be ignored without notice.  
• Work turned -in on time is eligible for partial credit . 
• Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered la te 
work and is exempted from the late work policy. (See Student Rule 7 .)  
 
Regr ading Policy  
A student can request regrading of any graded material if the student believes that the points 
assigned are inconsistent with the quality and merits of the submitted work. To request re -grading 
the student needs to follow the guidelines below:  
1. Regrading requests must be submitted to the Instructor within one week after the graded 
item has been retu rned to the student. After this time limit no regrading requests will be 
honored.  
2. Regrading requests must be in written form, accompanied by a reasonable amount of 
specific justification and documentation.  
 
 
  
Page 3 of 5 
  
 
 
 
 
Course Schedule  
 
The tentative course sc hedule is as follows:  
Week 1 ( 1/18 -) Introduction , Review of Asymptotic Analysis  
Week 2 ( 1/24 -) Lower Bounds  
Week 3 ( 1/31 -) Divide and Conquer  
Week 4 ( 2/7-) Divide and Conquer  
Week 5 ( 2/14-) Greedy Algorithms  
Week 6 ( 2/21-) Dynamic Programming  
Week 7 ( 2/28 -) Midterm  (3/1), Amortized Analysis  
Week 8 ( 3/7-) Graph Algorithms  
Week 9 (3/14 -) Spring Break  
Week 10 (3/21 -) Graph Algorithms   
Week 1 1 (3/28 -) Randomized Algorithms  
Week 1 2 (4/4-) Randomized Algorithms  
Week 1 3 (4/11 -) NP completeness  
Week 1 4 (4/18 -) NP completeness , Approximation Algorithms  
Week 1 5 (4/25 -) Undecidability , Review  
 
Exams  
 
All exams will be given in class .  
Midterm exam : Tuesday , March 1, in class   
Final exam : Thursday, May 5, 3:00 pm – 5:00 pm, in our class room  
 
Lectures and More  
 
All course information will be given in class. Important messages will be posted in canvas. You should 
check your course announcements , course material and due dates  daily . It is strongly recommended 
that you keep up with the course material and do not fall behind. Start working on assignments as soon 
as they are assigned.   
  
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student respons ibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and relat ed documentation and timelines.  
  
Page 4 of 5 
 Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropr iate by the instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX  of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule  7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students w ho request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code.  (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do. ” 
 
All homework must be completed on your own, and written in your own words.  
 
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic mis conduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights a nd responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu  
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disa bility or think you may have a 
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or 
visit disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities may include, but are not limited to  attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Title IX and Statement on Li mits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual  
Page 5 of 5 
 harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student worker s, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see Univers ity Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class 
discussion, email, text, o r social media post.  Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, you will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a 
formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware o f the range of options 
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).   
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing suppor tive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self -
care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). 
Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the 
National Sui cide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 
COVID Statement  
To help protect Aggieland and stop the spread of COVID -19, Texas A&M University urges students to be 
vacci nated and to wear masks in classrooms and all other academic facilities on campus, including labs. 
Doing so exemplifies the Aggie Core Values of respect, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by 
putting community concerns above individual preferences . COVID -19 vaccines and masking – regardless 
of vaccination status – have been shown to be safe and effective at reducing spread to others, infection, 
hospitalization, and death.  
 