TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY – DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND 
ENGINEERING  Spring 2022   
 
 
   
CSCE 312  
All Sections   
   
Spring 202 2  IN THIS SYLLABUS:  
Course Description  
The course objective is to integrate 
key notions from algorithms, 
computer architecture, compilers, 
and software engineering in one 
unified framework.  This will be done 
constructively, by building a general -
purpo se computer system from the 
ground up. In the process, we will 
explore many ideas and techniques 
used in the design of modern 
hardware and software systems, and 
discuss major trade -offs and future 
trends. Throughout this journey, you 
will gain many cross -section views of 
the computing field, from the bare - 
bone details of switching circuits to 
the high -level  abstraction of 
software design. The course consists 
of materials on the following topics: 
introduction to computer systems, 
data representation, machine 
language, processor architecture, 
memory hierarchy, and assembler. 
Several laboratory assignments will  
provide hands -on experience to 
many of the above topics.  
 
Catalog Description  
Introduction to computer systems 
from programmer’s perspective: 
simple logic design, data 
representation and processor architecture, programming of 
processors, memory, control flow, 
input/output, and performance 
measurements; hands -on lab 
assignments.  
Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) 
Policy Statement  
The Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) is a federal anti -discrimination 
statute that provides comprehensive 
civil rights p rotection for persons 
with disabilities. Among other 
things, this legislation requires that 
all students with disabilities be 
guaranteed a learning environment 
that provides for reasonable 
accommodation of their disabilities. 
If you believe you have a disa bility 
requiring an accommodation, please 
contact Disability Services, located 
at the Department of Disability 
Resources at 471 Houston Street  or 
call 979 -845 -1637. For additional 
information, visit 
http://disabil ity.tamu.edu .
 
 
Syllabus: Computer Organization  Course  
Description  Page 1  
Catalog  
Description  Page 1  
ADA  Page 1  
Prerequisites  Page 2  
Getting Started  Page 2  
Important Dates  Page 2  
 
Resources  Page 2/3  
Course Copyright  Page 3 
Course Plagiarism  Page 3 
Office Hours  Page 4  
People  Page 4  
Methodology  Page 5  
Tentative  
Schedule  Page 5  
Resources  Page 5  
Programming  Page 5  
Communication  Page 5  
Grading  Page 6  
Make Up  & Late Work  Page 7  
Course Support  Page 7 
Student Rules  Page 8 
Academic Integrity  Page 8  
Course Acknowledgments  Page 9 CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 2 
 
Prerequisites  
All the computer science knowledge necessary for 
completing this course is given in the course lectures, 
projects, and textbook. Lab assignments will require basic 
computer programming skills. Some co-requisite basic 
background in data structures and algorithms will be 
helpful . 
Getting Started  
1. Review the entire syllabus . 
2. Log into  Canvas  using your TAMU NetID and 
password.  
3. Sign on to Microsoft Teams  (instructions provided 
on pp. 3 of this document)  Important Announcement  
Course runs from Jan 18, 202 2 – Apr 27, 202 2.  
• Exams: There will be 2 exams  (midterm and final) 
to test knowledge of key topics.  
o Midterm Exam:  Wednesday  March 9 
during respective LAB sessions.  
o Final Exam:  Wednesday  April 27 during 
respective LAB sessions . 
• Projects:  There will be 7 projects  spread  evenly 
through the course content . 
 
 
Resources  
TEXTBOOK  
CSCE 312: The Elements of Computing Systems, Second Edition  Building a Modern 
Computer from First Principles , By  Noam Nisan, Shimon Schocken.   
Publisher: MIT Press, 20 21.  
Online Link  (1st half of the book is free):  https://www.nand2tetris.org/  
The first half of the textbook is available free online . This is what we cover in the 
course in addition to advanced concepts that are covered from other sources. Printed 
copy of the book may be available in Campus Bookstore as well as other book 
suppliers like Amazon, Barnes & Noble, MIT Press, etc. Purchase of course textbook is 
NOT REQUIRED . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 REFERENCE TEXTBOOK S – PURCHASE NOT REQUIRED  
Computer Systems: A Programmer's Perspective, Randal E. Bryant and David R. 
O'Hallaron, Prentice Hall, 2015 .  
Digital Design, 2nd Ed, Frank Vahid, Wiley Publication, 2010  
The reference from Bryant and O’Hallaron is useful for advanced CS course like CS -
313.   I do not recommend purchasing the Vahid book because it will be referenced in a 
very limited capacity.  
COMPUTER  
You  are required  to have a computing device on which  you have  permission to install 
software . Please contact  the instructor if you do not have a computing device.  
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) is an initiative in the college of engineering where 
students are required to bring  their own computing device to class. The following link 
explains the program and provides inf ormation about approved devices: 
https://engineering.tamu.edu/easa/areas/academics/byod .   Approved BYOD devices  CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 3 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  fulfill the  requirements for this class , although many other devices are sufficient (i.e. 
you probably don’t have to buy a new computer for this class .) 
WEB  
CANVAS :  https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/138081  
Primarily used for  course material  and publishing  of grades . In the past, we have also hosted 
online exams on Canvas . 
The recommended browsers for Canvas  access are  Safari (MAC), Mozilla Firefox or Google 
Chrome .  
MICROSOFT TEAMS :  All course communication  will occur  on Microsoft  Teams . This is 
provided free to all students. The primary benefit is that for many questions everyone can 
see the answer and other students can answer as well. Teams has excellent mobile and 
desktop support, and has direct messaging and video conferencing capabilities. W e believe 
the platform is fairl y well suited to promote a healthy interaction  between the students, as 
well as with the teaching staff .  Instructions on signing up to TEAMS are posted on 
Canvas  in Student Resources Module →  How do I setup Microsoft TEAMS  document.  
 
 
 
CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 4 
 
Course Logistics:  
 
LECTURES  
The course lectures will be offered in 
“asynchronous” pre-recorded  format . 
Barring exceptions, t he lecture materials 
will be released on Canvas by  11:59pm on 
Saturday for  the week  ahead (typically two 
sets) in accordance with the master schedule 
(see pp. 6 of this document) . 
LABS  
The Labs will be held F2F . See 
HOWDY for LAB timings of your section .  
 
People  
Instructor  
Aakash  Tyagi , PhD  
Professor  of Practice  
• Email : tyagi@cse.tamu.edu  
• Web : http://faculty.cse.tamu.edu/tyagi/  
Office Hours  
To be announced on Course Teams Site  
Teaching  Assistants : 
 
Mayukh Roy Chowdhury: mayukhrc95@tamu.edu   
Sagar Adhikari : sagar0073@tamu.edu   
Peer Teachers  
Kaleb Dickerson  kaleb.dickerson2001@tamu.edu   
Cale b Terry  calebterry@tamu.edu   
Senhe Hao  senhehao@tamu.edu    
 
Office Hours  
To be announced on Course Teams Site  
 
 
 
 
  
CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 5 
 
Methodology  
This is mostly a hands -on course, evolving around building 
a series of hardware and software modules. Each module 
development task is accompanied by a design document, 
an API, an executable solution, a test script (illustrating 
what the module is supposed to do), and a detailed 
implementation plan (proposing how to build it). The  
projects are spread out evenly and tightly coupled with the 
lecture material .  Each lecture will start by reviewing the 
work that was done thus far, and giving guidelines on what 
to do nex t.  
Resources  
All the baseline course materials – lecture notes, book 
chapters, simulators, software tools, tutorials and test 
programs – can be downloaded freely from the course web 
site http://www.nand2tetris.org . Your teaching staff will 
guide you through the early p hase of software installation 
and Do’s and Don’ts The supplied software can run as is on 
Linux or Windows or Mac OS. The lecture notes presented 
in class are modified with Instructor’s own thoughts and 
inputs as deemed necessary.  
Programming  
The hardware p rojects will be done in a simple Hardware 
Description Language (HDL) that can be learned in a few 
hours. It is covered i n the Appendix in our Textbook and 
will also be covered by the TA’s in the LAB. The resulting 
chips (as well as the topmost computer -on-a-chip system) 
will be tested and simulated on a supplied hardware 
simulator, running on the student's computer. The 
software projects can be done in Java or Python or C++.  
Any exceptions to this will be noted in the project 
documents.  
Communication  
The te aching staff will do its best to communicate relevant 
administrative information (deadlines, information about 
posted material, details about projects, locations of 
tutorials, and so on) in an effective and timely manner on 
Teams . E-mails lis ted on Exchang e are used for 
communication . If you are not receiving updates, please 
contact the instructor. Please use Teams  for all 
corre spondence related to the course . This is a very 
convenient and potentially effective way to communicate 
with the teaching staff . Order of Topics  (subject to change)  
 
BLOCK  TOPIC (PROJECT RELEASE)  
1 Introduction and Setup , Boolean Algebra, 
Combinational Logic Design (Project  1)  
2 Combinational Logic Design, Boolean 
Arithmetic (Project 2), Sequential Logic 
Design (Project 3)  
3 Machine Language (Project 4)  
4 CPU Architecture (Project 5), Assembler 
(Project 6)  
5 Advanced Topics: Memory Hierarchy, 
Virtual Memory, Cache Memory  (Project 7)  
 
 CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 6 
 
Grading* 
 
EXAMS  
  
36% There will be a total of 2  exams . Exams WILL NOT 
be comprehensiv e. Date and Time of the exams are shown 
on page 2 of this document. The mode of exams and other 
logistical advice will be provided ahead of the exams.  
 
 • 20% Midterm, 16% 
Final  
Exams will be a 
combination of 
problem solving and 
multiple -choice 
questions . 
QUIZZES  
   
8% There will be a bunch of take -home online quizzes aligned with lecture content. These  are 
key opportunities to build and apply fundamental concepts to problem solving.  
PROJECTS  
   
56% Projects are aligned lock -step with the course lecture content and help us reinforce the in -
class learnings and vice -versa. Some portion of the project may be a ssigned as “online lab -
quiz”.  
There will be a total of 7 projects  
All projects carry equal weight  unless specified otherwise . 
Master Plan – SUBJECT TO CHANGE  
 
% total  >=90  80-89 70-79 60-69 <60 
Letter Grade A B C D F 
 CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 7 
 
Make Up  & Late Work  
Please review Texas A&M student rule 7:  
http://student -rules.tamu.edu/rule07  
Participation  is  
 expected .  
It is your  responsibility to keep up with the class , even when 
unexpected events interfere .   
Exam Make Up  
Missed exams will only be rescheduled for university 
excused absences. Note that if advanced notice is not 
feasible, you have 2 business days to provide 
notification.  See student rules . A zero will be as signed for 
exams due to an unexcused absence.  Documentation must 
be submitted prior  to making up  a missed exam.  
Late Quiz/Project Submission  
• Quiz : Late submissions not accepted without prior 
approval.  
• Projects : Note details as described belo w: 
• Submission time is determined by the timestamp 
recorded for your submission on Canvas . If 
submitted late, project s will receive a grading 
penalty. The number of minutes late the work is 
turned in ( m) will be used to compute the penalty. 
Your overall grade for the project  will be multiplied 
by 0.9998m. Everyone will be given 5 credit days 
for the semester which translates to 5*24*60 = 
7200 minutes. Penalty will be charged only for 
late minutes that exceed 7200.   
• Adjusted Project Total = (Raw Total Project 
Score * 0.9998(m-7200))for m>7200  
• How turning in late work can affect your grade:  
Minutes Late  Max Grade  
5 99.9%  
60 98.8%  
1440 (1 day)  75%  
2880 (2 days)  56.2%  
4320 (3 days)  42.1%  
  
Course Support  
In addition to contacting the instructor or graduate 
assistant for course con tent related questions, there are  a 
variety of campus resources for course support.   
Technology Support:  
For technological issues  related to Canvas and CSE S/W , 
contact the TAMU Help Desk:  
• Student Canvas  Help Website, 
https://lms.tamu.edu/Training -Support   
• TAMU IT Help Desk : 
o Website:  http://hdc.tamu.edu/index.php   
(Online Chat is available)  
o Phone: (979) 845 -8300  
o Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu  
• CSE Help Desk  
o Website:  
https://wiki.cse.tamu.edu/index.php/Main_Page  
o Phone:  (979) 845 -5550  
o Email:  helpdesk@cse.tamu.edu  
The TAMU Help Desk is open 24 hours a day 7 days a 
week.  If your technical problems are una ble to be resolved 
within 48 hours, please contact instructor s or TAs  for 
additional assistance.  
Technology issues are not an excuse for 
missing a course requirement – make 
sure your computer is configured 
correctly and address issues well in 
advance of de adlines.  
CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 8 
 
Student Rules  
Each student has the responsibility to be fully acquainted with and to comply with the Texas A&M University Student 
Rules. More specific rules, information and procedures may be fou nd in various publications pertaining to each particular 
service or department.  For more information, please visit http://student -rules.tamu.edu/  
Academic Integrity  
“An Aggie does 
not lie, cheat or 
steal, or tolerate 
those who do.”  
 
Upon accepting admission to Texas A&M University, 
a student immediately assumes a commitment to 
uphold the Honor Code, to accept responsibility for learning, and to follow the philosophy and rules of the Honor System. 
Students will be required to state their commitment on examinations, research papers, and other academic work. 
Ignorance of the rules does not exclude any member of the TAMU community from the requirements or the processes of 
the Honor System.  
Aggi e Honor System Office  
You should be familiar with the Aggie Honor System Office. Their website provides more information on acade mic 
integrity, plagiarism, etc. http://aggiehonor.tamu.edu/  
• Definitions  of academic misconduct, including plagiarism  
• Potential sanctions  (LINK) 
Acknowledgement  
By submitting anything for grading, you are essentially saying “On my honor, as an Aggie, I have neither given nor received 
unauthorized aid on this academic work. In particular, I certify that I have listed above  all the sources that I consulted 
regarding this assignment, and that I have not received or given any assistance that is contrary to the letter or the spirit of 
the collaboration guidelines for this assignment. ”
Plagiarism  
Individual programming MUST  be d one on your own. You 
must write assignments in your own words. Plagiarism will 
not be tolerated  and violations will be reported to the 
Honor Council . 
To help identify possible instances of plagiarism, we may 
use automated systems for plagiarism detection. Students 
found to have engaged in plagiarism will be referred to the 
Aggie Honor System.  Collaboration  
Collaboration is important for facilitating learning, and 
your peers can be a great resource.  So you are encouraged 
to discuss problems and general approaches with each 
other (but not actual solutions). Regardless, unless stated 
otherwise, all assignments must be done on your own . It is 
okay to share general approaches, directions, and so on. 
You may not  look at someone else’s code (online or in 
person).  If you have an issue that needs clarification, 
contact an instructor or TA . Additional overriding 
instructions and grading policies on permitted 
collaboration may  be provided in the project documen ts.
CSCE 312  | Spring  2022 9 
 
 
Course Acknowledgments  
The course owes its existence to the Nand2Tetris organizers 
Prof. Nisan and Schocken ( http://www.nand2tetris.org ). 
Additional material taught in this course is taken from the 312 
course taught by Prof. E.J. Kim 
(http://faculty.cse.tamu.edu/ejkim/ ), Professor Milos Prvulovic 
from Georgia Tech ( http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~milos/ ), and 
Professor Luis Ceze from University of Washington 
(https://www.cs.washington.edu/people/faculty/luisceze ). 
The instructor wishes to express sincere appreciation to the 
following notable st udents from prior semesters for making 
lasting contributions and impact on the teaching and content 
of this course:  
1. Jyoti “JD” Dass (Graduate PhD Student and CSCE -312 
TA SU’16, FA’17, SP’18, SP’19, FA’19 ,Su’21 ). He is the 
biggest difference -maker and inspi ration for this 
course through  his several key initiatives.  
2. Jiayao (Amy) Li, Student CSCE -312 Su’17, Typewrote 
all of Instructor’s handwritten 4 -Pager notes.  
3. Kevin Kuriachan, TA Sp’20, FA’20, SP’21. Created all 
lab exercise recordings.  
4. Teddy Heinen, TA SP’ 20, FA’20, SP’21. Contributed to 
significant automation for projects and grading.  
5. Jerry Yiu (Graduate PhD Student and CSCE -312 TA 
FA’15, FA’16). Designed several project exercises.  
6. Samira Mirbagher (Graduate PhD Student and CSCE -
312 TA SP’19). Introduced s everal innovative ideas inc l. 
Disassembler and HackerRank for Assembler.  
7. Austin Hamilton ’16 (Peer Teacher CSCE -312 FA’15, 
SP’16, FA’16). Responsible for the first all -around 
course grading automation.  
8. Rui Liu (Graduate Student and CSCE -312 grader SU’17, 
FA’17). Created several project exercises .  
9. Yang Yang (Student CSCE -312 SP’16). Introduced new 
HACK instructions and created new exercises.  
10. Muhammad Ashfaq (Student CSCE -312 SP’16). Carried 
out project o n pipelining HACK CPU.  
11. Zac Steer and Bobby Hodge ’19 (Peer Teachers CSCE -
312 FA’17, SP’18, FA’18)  
12. Matthew Sheffield (Student CSCE -312 SP’18). Created 
a new game exercise in HACK.  
13. Kyle Coffey (Student CSCE -312 SP’19). Offered several 
creative ideas for cour se improvement.  
14. Mayukh RoyChowdhury (Graduate PhD Student and 
CSCE -312 TA SU’19, SU’20 , FA’20, Sp’21 ). Contributed 
to several exercises in Projects 3, 4, 5.  
15. Undergraduate TA’s – Maitreyi Ramaswamy, Lekhitha 
Ammaresh, Shravan Kumaran, Edgar Martinez, Feras 
Khemakhem, Jose ‘Gera’ Garza, Carolyn Nguyen, 
Jeremy Spotts, Ezekiel Blevins, Evelyn Crowe, Neel 
Pochareddy, Melissa Zhang, Hanson Yu, Alex Labbane. Contributed several lab exercises and 
productivity improvements.  
16. Fatma Elsheimy, TA Su’21. Drove initiative to create 
Verilog interface with the objective of hardware 
realization in FPGA  
17. Pranav Jain, SP’21. Drove the development of HDL 
Visualizer.  
 
 