 
Page 1 of 5 
 Syllabus  CSCE 440/640  
 
 
Course Information  
 
Course Number:   CSCE 440/640  (Klappenecker)  
Course Title:   Quantum Algorithms    
Time: TR 9:35 am – 10:50 am  
Location:  HRBB 113   
  
Credit Hours:  3  
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:  Andreas Klappenecker   
Office:  zoom     
E-Mail:  klappi  at cse.tamu.edu   
Office Hours:  WF 10:30 am – 11:30 am , all office hours will be held on zoom  
  
Course Description  and Prerequisites  
This course gives a self -contained introduction to quantum algorithms, one of the most exciting recent 
developments in computer science. We do not expect any background knowledge in quantum 
computing nor in quantum physics. You should know how to multiply a matrix with a vector, but the 
most important prerequisite is simply an open mind.  
Course Learning Outcomes  
At the end of this course, students should understand the basics of the quantum circuit model, be able 
to understand fundamental quantum algorithm s, and ways to protect quantum information.  
Textbook and Resource Materials  
Required : 
P. Kaye, R. Laflamme, and M. Mosca: An Introduction to Quantum Computing, Oxford, 2007 (reprinted 
2010).  
Recommended (for a more in depth study):  
M. Nielsen and I. Chua ng: Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University 
Press, 2011.  
Resou rces: https://canvas.tamu.edu  (check daily for updates)  
  
Page 2 of 5 
  
Grading Policy  
 
Your grade will be based on the following components:  
- Midterm exam 30%: The exams will be given in class .  
- Final project 40%: You will have to write a term paper and record your presentation  
- homework and exercises 30%: Th is is a mix of online questions and  essay style assignments, for 
which you  are required to use the  LaTeX  typesetting system to type in your  answers. All 
assignments  can be found in canvas .  Your lowest homework grade will be dropped.  CSCE 640 
students will be expected to solve some slightly  more challenging homework problems.   
 
Final grades will be assigned according to this scale:  
A: 90 and above, B: [80,90), C: [70,80), D:[60,70), F: below 60  
A slight curve might be applied if the course average is low.  
 
Late Work Policy  
 
• All assignments must be submitted on canvas . 
• No late submissions will be accepted.  
• E-mail submissions will not be accepted and will be ignored without notice.  
• Work turned -in on time is eligible for partial credit . 
• Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late 
work and is exempted from the late work policy. (See Student Rule 7 .)  
 
Regarding Policy  
A student can request r egrading of any graded material if the student believes that the points 
assigned are inconsistent with the quality and merits of the submitted work. To request re -grading 
the student needs to follow the guidelines below:  
1. Regrading requests must be submitt ed to the Instructor within one week after the graded 
item has been returned to the student. After this time limit no regrading requests will be 
honored.  
2. Regrading requests must be in written form, accompanied by a reasonable amount of 
specific justificat ion and documentation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 3 of 5 
 Course Schedule  
 
Tentative course schedule:  
Week 1 ( 1/18-) Introduction , Quantum Cryptography  
Week 2 ( 1/24-) Quantum Gates  
Week 3 ( 1/31 -) Quantum Circuits  
Week 4 ( 2/7-) Quantum Search  
Week 5 ( 2/14-) Quantum Counting  
Week 6 ( 2/21-) Simon’s Algorithm  
Week 7 ( 2/28)  Midterm  (3/1),  Factoring  
Week 8 ( 3/7-) Factoring  
Week 9 ( 3/15) Spring Break  
Week 10 ( 3/21-) Quantum Complexity  
Week 11 ( 3/28-) Quantum Communication  
Week 12  (4/4-) Quantum Codes  
Week 13  (4/11-) Fault Tolerance  
Week 14  (4/18-) Project Presentations  
Week 15  (4/26-) Project Presentations  
 
Exam  and Final Project  
 
Midterm exam : Thursday, March 1, in class  
 
Final project:  The final project consists of writing a term paper and a presentation. Reviewing the work 
of others will be expected as part of the final project.  
 
Lectures and More  
 
All course information can be found on  canvas . In your CSCE 4 40/640  section on  canvas , navigate to the 
“Lectures and more” tab on the sidebar for the most important information concerning lectures, 
quizzes, exams, reading assignments, etc. You should also check your course announcements daily .  
 
It is strongly recommended that you keep up wit h the course material and do not fall behind. Start 
working on assignments as soon as they are assigned.  
 
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
  
Page 4 of 5 
 Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a s tudent’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropriate by the instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, inclu ding definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code.  (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do. ” 
 
All homework must be completed on your own, and written in your own words.  
 
 “Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. 
If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about th e Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu  
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Stud ent Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or 
visit disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. Al l students are encouraged to discuss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environ ment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual  
Page 5 of 5 
 harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee ex periences, observes, or becomes aware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harass ment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the  information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class 
discussion, email, text, or social media post.  Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, y ou will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a 
formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options 
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).   
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing suppor tive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health an d wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self -
care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). 
Stud ents who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 
COVID Statement  
To help protect Aggieland and stop the spread of COVID -19, Texas A&M University urges students to be 
vaccinated and to wear masks in classrooms and all other academic facilities on campus, including labs. 
Doing so exemplifies the Aggie Core Values of respe ct, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by 
putting community concerns above individual preferences. COVID -19 vaccines and masking – regardless 
of vaccination status – have been shown to be safe and effective at reducing spread to others, infection,  
hospitalization, and death.  
 