1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 1/15S y l l ab u s
Senior Capstone Design
Effective design requires identifying the “right” problem to solve, building components that meet that
problem’ s needs, and integrating components into a single solution system.  As problems become
more challenging, solid design, follow through, and teamwork skills become necessary to developing
a solution.  Every computer scientist and computer engineer who wants to work on big problems
must have these skills. 
After this course, you will be able to:
analyze  a complex computing problem and  identify  solutions using computing principles,
design, implement, and evaluate  a computing-based solution to meet a given set of
requirements,
apply  computer science theory and software development fundamentals to  produce  computing-
based solutions,
collaborate  effectively as a member of a team,
recognize  professional responsibilities, both legal and ethical, and  make informed
judgements  in computing practice, and
communicate
You will work in groups of 4-5 people to complete a significant engineering design project.  Every
project requires complete implementation, documentation, evaluation, and demonstration of a
computing system design. The focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology ,
management process, and teamwork.  At the end of the semester , each group will make a public
presentation describing and demonstrating their work.
 
Why I Teach this Course
This course of fers you a unique learning experience.  The T A and I are always especially excited to
teach this course, and here is why:
You finally get to combine everything that you have learned throughout your entire
undergraduate curriculum.  This not only includes the computer science skills you have gained,
but also the professional, cultural, and communication skills that you have developed.
This is an opportunity for you to try to solve a problem that matters to you.  This course
gives you a lot of freedom and choice in your semester-long project. This course can be the first
step towards moving to the career of your choice.1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 2/15Building a system from start to finish is fun and rewarding.  Students often tell me that this
was the greatest experience of their entire college career .
Working on teams can be messy , but it’ s worth it.  It is amazing what you can accomplish
together , so much more than on your own. W orking on real problems with real people has its
challenges, but it is also very rewarding when you successfully complete your goals.
Every semester is different, every team is different, every solution is different.  There is
always something new to learn and innovate.
Smaller class sizes and weekly meetings allow you to connect  with your classmates and your
instructor .
 
About Working in Teams
Because your teammates' grades are so tightly coupled with your own dedication to the class, many
of the assignments and rules are put in place to protect you and your teammates. These include
requirements to participate actively in class, complete assignments in a timely manner , and treat your
classmates with respect.
Each team is required to:
Time Management:  Manage its own ef forts to complete its project in a timely manner . You are
graded based on both the quality of the group product and their individual contributions.
Weekly Status Update Meetings:  Hold a  weekly meeting with the course instructor and the T As
during the of ficial class hours. These meetings must be attended by every group member . Since
the projects will be student managed, the exact nature and style of these meetings is at the
group’ s discretion, e.g., division of tasks among group members.  However , every member of the
group is expected to participate  in these meetings .
 
Course Information
Course Number: 482  
Course T itle: Senior Capstone Design   
Section: 934  
Time: Mondays and W ednesdays 8:00am-1 1:00pm  (Lecture and Lab)  
Location:  Engineering Activities Building A  (https://aggiemap.tamu.edu/?bldg=0460)  118  
Credit Hours: 3
 
Instructor and TA Details
Instructor: Shawna Thomas  
Office: 319 Peterson  1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 3/15Phone: 979-862-8877  
E-Mail: sthomas@tamu.edu  (mailto:sthomas@tamu.edu)  
Help/Of fice Hours: email for appointment
TA: Yuno Min  
E-Mail: minsibo0420@tamu.edu  (mailto:minsibo0420@tamu.edu)  
Help/Of fice Hours: directly after class or email for appointment
 
Course Description
Project-based course to develop system integration skills for solving real-world problems in computer
science; significant team software project that integrates advanced concepts across computer
science specializations; projects require design, implementation, documentation and demonstration,
as well as design methodology , management process and teamwork.
 
Course Prerequisites
Senior classification; CSCE 315 , CSCE 41 1, and two additional CSCE tracked courses
 
Special Course Designation
C (communication intensive course)
As a communication intensive course, you will receive instruction on writing and public speaking and
complete assignments so you can master communication related to the major . You must pass the
written and oral components with a C or better to earn a grade in the course.
 
Course Learning Outcomes
This course will prepare you for engineering practice with a major design experience based on the
knowledge and skills you acquired in earlier course work. Y our design will incorporate engineering
standards and realistic constraints that include most of the following considerations: economic,
environmental, sustainability manufacturability ethical health and safety , social, and political.
After this course you will be able to:
Analyze  a complex computing problem and to  apply  principles of computing and other relevant
disciplines to identify solutions.
Design, implement and evaluate  a computing-based solution to meet a given set of computing
requirements in the context of the program's discipline.1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 4/15Communicate  effectively in a variety of professional contexts.
Recognize  professional responsibilities and  make informed judgements  in computing practice
based on legal and ethical principles.
Collaborate  effectively as a member or leader of a team engaged in activities appropriate to the
program's discipline.
Apply  computer science theory and software development fundamentals to  produce  computing-
based solutions.
We will cover man topics including:
Identifying engineering problems
Project management tools
Ethics in the discipline
Communicating problem motivation and needs
Exploring existing solutions
Designing a computing system and user interface
Evaluating a computing system through user studies and benchmark testing
Analyzing and interpreting data
Communicating and summarizing results, both written and orally
 
Textbook and/or Resource Materials
Required:
Design of Everyday Things.  (https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/tamucs/detail.action?
docID=1167019)  (Basic Books 2013). A vailable free online at T AMU Libraries.
Recommended:
The Five Dysfunctions of a T eam: a Leadership Fable.  Patrick M. Lencioni. (Jossey-Bass, 2002).
Available free online at T AMU Libraries.
Technical material from the literature, manufacturers’ data sheets and user manuals.
 
ABET Accreditation Information
This course is evaluated every year through the ABET (Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology) accreditation process. ABET accreditation provides assurance that a college or
university program meets the quality standards of the profession for which that program prepares
graduates. Y our degree is a significant achievement and perhaps the largest investment you will
make toward your future. The quality of education you receive makes a big dif ference in your career
success.1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 5/15ABET accreditation:
Verifies that your educational experience meets the global standard  for technical education
in your profession.
Enhances your employment opportunities —multinational corporations require graduation from
an accredited program.
Supports your entry to a technical profession  through licensure, registration and certification
—all of which often require graduation from an ABET -accredited program as a minimum
qualification.
Establishes your eligibility  for many federal student loans, grants, and/or scholarships.
Paves the way for you to work globally , because ABET accreditation is recognized worldwide
through international agreements, and many other countries’ national accrediting systems are
based on the ABET model.
In order for the department of Computer Science & Engineering to keep their accreditation, the
students must demonstrate their abilities in each of the above expected outcomes of this class. Each
of those skills will be evaluated by external industrial af filiate members during your final presentation.
 
Grading Policy
The final grade you will receive in the class will be based on points accumulated  during the
semester . Thus, both continued progress (the process) and the quality of your product (and other
deliverables) will determine your grade. Although the bulk of your grade is based on the performance
of your team, individual performance will also be gauged. Unless otherwise noted on the syllabus or
class calendar , all assignments will be due before class on the due date. 
As a communication course, you must pass the communication components (both written and
oral) with a C or better to earn a grade in the course. Failure to pass the communication
components with a C or better results in an F for the course.
Grading Scale:
Grades will be assigned according to the following scale: A >= 90 > B >= 80 > C >= 70 > D >= 60 > F
These grades represent varying degrees of achievement (see the university's grading system
(https://registrar.tamu.edu/Transcripts-Grades/Grades#0-GradingSystem) ): A = excellent, B = good, C
= satisfactory , D = passing, F = failing.
We make every ef fort to provide you with the opportunity to earn an A. W e do not curve in this class.
Rather , we teach to mastery which means that we have clear expectations in terms of what you
should complete and what knowledge you should have obtained by the end of the course to succeed
and to earn an A. If you are taking this class, participate appropriately , resubmit and fix your work1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 6/15based on our feedback, and work equitably with your team, you should get an A. Y ou will have every
opportunity to earn an A, so at the end of the course an 89.9 is a B.
Grading Components:
Your grade for this course reflects your mastery of course material and is determined by multiple
components. Note that you will not receive a passing grade in the class if you do not have a
tested and working system by the end of the semester . The lower weighted items will significantly
help you succeed in your higher-weighted items. Even if a component has a very low point value, it is
crucial to your later success in the higher point components.
Component Percentage
Written Communication Elements 20%
Oral Communication Elements 15%
Final Deliverables and Individual
Contribution30%
Project Management 5%
Testing 15%
Status Updates 5%
Daily Quizzes 2%
Peer Feedback and Peer
Evaluation3%
Ethics 5%
Total 100%
Written Communication Elements - 20%:  You will have several technical writing assignments
including (but not limited to) problem formation, related literature review , project proposals,
documentation, and your final report. Y our writing will be critiqued on its thoroughness and
effectiveness in communicating key aspects of your system such as its motivation, approach,
evaluation, and engineering standard. Y our d ocumentation will be critiqued on its completeness to
properly execute and understand the details of your system. Some assignments will require you to
incorporate peer feedback to refine your work.
Oral Communication Elements - 15%:  You will have several presentation assignments including
(but not limited to) a critical design review , a final presentation, and demonstrations. Y ou will have
opportunity to practice presenting both posters and more formal slide presentations. Some
assignments will require you to incorporate peer feedback to refine your communication. Additionally ,
at least one member of your team will present your project at Student Research W eek (SR W), the
Engineering Project Showcase (EPS), and the T AMU CSCE IAP Spring meeting (if held) to provide1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 7/15you with extra practice in communicating your work and responding to external feedback. Y our final
presentation will be to the instructors and industry panelists on the reading day before finals . You
will also give live system demonstrations to the instructors in class at multiple points in the course.
Final Deliverables and Individual Contribution - 30%: You will complete several deliverables
including fully documented code, evaluation materials, final report with user manual, final updated
oral presentation slides, final updated poster , and video advertisement. Y ou will also conduct a live
demonstration of your project. Y our individual grade for this section may be adjusted based on your
level of contribution  determined from logged code commits, peer evaluation, and instructor/T A
observations.   All final deliverables must be submitted in order to receive a grade for this
section.
Final Deliverables
1. Team Drive files including the following (please organize into folders, e.g., Docs, Source,
Hardware, Media, References, Freeware, etc.)
1. Designs: code, schematics, data, data sheets, freeware software tools, etc.
2. Reports: proposal, weekly reports, final report, and ALL presentations
3. Audiovisual media: close-up pictures of your system  and a high-quality video presenting your
project (including a system demo and a project description) for posterity (see gallery in the
course webpage for movie samples). Final video must be submitted to the instructor
4. Presentation posters: in PDF and PPT format
5. Individual assignments: in PDF format
2. Final prototype in the assigned GitHub Repository , as well as any spare parts and supplies
3. Software install, to be demonstrated on several machines
NOTE  : Grades will not be assigned until  all project deliverables have been turned in (see above),
all borrowed items (e.g., keys, books, equipment) have been returned to their proper location or their
owner , and the workstations in the lab have been thoroughly cleaned up. All team members are
required to be present at the time of the final delivery . All final deliverables are due  on the last day of
class at 1 1:59 PM.
Project Management - 5% : You will create project management artifacts specific to your chosen
software development methodology . For example, teams using Agile development will provide a
product backlog, sprint backlogs, and burn-down charts while teams using W aterfall will provide a
requirements specification, a software architecture design, and a Gantt chart. All teams will specify
team member roles and produce user stories. Y ou are also expected to use T AMU GitHub for version
control and commit to your team's repository weekly , if not daily .
Testing - 15%: Your project must be evaluated in accordance with industry standards, so you need to
test the technical performance of your developed materials as your project goes on. Y ou are
expected to develop an automatic test bed for your project. Y ou should also have appropriate unit
testing, integration testing, and system testing throughout your code to verify functionality . You will1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 8/15also have user acceptance testing through a user study to evaluate your system's ability to solve your
problem. Y ou will be assessed on how well you have prepared and conducted the evaluation of your
system, both internally (through unit/integration/system testing) and externally (through user study).
Note that completing this user study is part of the required final deliverables and it not optional, even
if you prefer to abandon the points.
Status Updates - 5%: You will submit weekly status update reports, both individually and as a team,
and hold a weekly status update meeting with your entire team and your instructors. T eam members
should take turns taking meeting minutes, submitting team reports, and leading the weekly meeting
discussion. Y ou will be also assessed on your team's ability to keep to the project schedule.
Daily Quizzes - 2%:  Every class (including the first class) will start with a 10-minute quiz. The
quizzes will include material about your assignments, questions about your design choices, and
knowledge that you should have gained from your past computer science courses. Research has
repeatedly shown that the act of quizzing imparts more knowledge than lecturing or studying. Thus,
this not only lets us know where your knowledge might be lacking so that we may be able to correct it
within this class, but it also serves to teach you the knowledge that you need to have. This course is
your final course in your computer science degree and should provide you with the capability to put
all of your skills together and communicate those capabilities ef fectively .
Peer Feedback and Peer Evaluation - 3%: Peer feedback of others' work is crucial. It is important
that your feedback is of high quality . You will give feedback to your peers regularly throughout the
semester on their project ideas, written work, and presentations. In addition, each member of your
project team will score the performance of your other team members at multiple points throughout the
semester . You will use these peer evaluations to adjust how you interact and collaborate in your
team. You must complete all of your peer reviews to get an A in the course.
Ethics - 5%: You will complete various activities and assignments to explore the ethics in the
discipline.
Class Participation:  The instructors will evaluate your attendance to meetings, participation in the
discussions, and contributions to the team.  More than five (5) unexcused absences will lead to an
automatic failure for the course . Note that team days in which teams may need to work in a remote
location to accomplish certain assignments (e.g., presenting your work at a conference or SR W,
interviewing experts, meeting with mentors, accessing technologies outside of the classroom, etc.) do
not count toward absences provided they are approved by the instructor in advance, abide by the
instructor ’s requirements for check-in during course time, abide by any activity reporting requirements
by the instructor , and complete all assignments on-time relevant to that class time. 
Submission of Assignments:
All assignments will be turned in electronically though Canvas  (https://canvas.tamu.edu/) (unless
otherwise specified) by the due date and time given on the assignment. Email submissions will not be
accepted.1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 9/15 
Late Work Policy
All assignments must be submitted to complete the course. Assignments will be considered late after
their posted deadline but will be accepted. Late assignments will receive a grade reduction of 10%
per day late with a maximum reduction of 30%.
 
Course Schedule
Below is the planned but tentative  schedule of topics and major projects for the course. All
assignment and project details will be communicated on  Canvas  (https://canvas.tamu.edu/) . 
Weeks Course Phases Major Deliverables
1-3Introduction, T eam Formation, and Project Ideation  
You will learn how to identify and formulate an engineering
problem, how to survey existing related work, how to use
design thinking to create innovative solutions to your
problem, and how to define project success. Y ou will also
explore elements of good and bad design. Y ou will practice
communicating your problem's motivation and user needs,
create a project management plan based on software
development methodologies, and complete ethics training.Finalized project proposal
and plan (due by end of
Week 3)
4-5Project Design and Skill Development  
You will learn how to create user stories and usage
scenarios and how to ef fectively prototype and test dif ferent
interface designs. Y ou will participate in rapid user studies
with peers on initial lo-fi prototypes, identify design moves in
response, and create a final system design. Y ou will also
complete a literature review tailored for your project that
places your work in the context of existing work and practice
communicating your solution and design. Y ou will begin
participating in peer evaluations within your team.Incremental submission of
final report elements
(various, see Canvas
assignments)
6-11Project Development  
You will implement your system design following standard
software development methodologies and using T AMU
GitHub for version control. Y ou will submit a new code
release and demo your project to the class every 2 weeks.Fully working system (due by
end of W eek 1 1)1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 10/15You will also submit weekly status updates, hold weekly
update meetings, and continue to participate in peer
evaluations. At the end of this phase, you will have a full
working system implemented and be ready for system
evaluation. Y ou will also continue to make iterative progress
on your final written report. 
12-13Project Evaluation  
You will thoroughly test your system's functionality according
to your evaluation plan. Y ou will also conduct a user study
and analyze collected data to evaluate the success of your
system. Y ou will communicate results from these two types
of evaluations in your final report. Y ou will continue to submit
weekly status updates, hold weekly update meetings, demo
your project to the class, and participate in peer evaluations.Fully evaluated system (due
by end of W eek 13)
14Project Finalization  
You will complete your final report and finish preparing all
final deliverables (see Grading Components above). Y ou will
practice communicating your problem, solution, and results
to the class. Y ou will submit your last weekly status update
and participate in your last peer review .Complete draft of final
deliverables (due by end of
Week 14)
15Project Presentations  
Senior projects will be presented to industry panelists.All final deliverables (due on
last day of class by
11:59pm )
Final Presentations to IAP
members ( on Final Reading
Day)
 
University and Course Policies
 
Inclusion Statement
In this class we are committed to a culture of inclusivity . We reject and condemn all forms of injustice
and actively promote diversity and inclusion within our field. As Martin Luther King Jr . said, “Injustice
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” If any student wishes to discuss anything regarding1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 11/15inclusivity within the classroom, especially anything contrary to this statement that you have
experienced, you are encouraged to contact the instructor or T A. 
 
Course Copyright
The materials used within this course are copyrighted.  These materials include, but are not limited
to, the syllabus, quizzes, assignments, activity descriptions, online content, course videos, audio and
visual recordings of classes, etc.  Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right
to copy or distribute these materials, unless permission is expressly granted.
 
Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility .
Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Importance of Attendance:  Not attending weekly meetings harms the other members of your
group and makes it much more dif ficult for the instructor to assess your contributions to the group
effort. Therefore, attendance, punctuality and active participation in the weekly meetings are
required. Due to the unfortunate consequences and undue burden your frequent absences would
have on the rest of the team,  more than 5 unexcused absences is an automatic failure .
Absence and T ardiness:  Failure to attend a meeting or late arrivals (more than 10 minutes late)
will be reflected in your individual grade. Emergencies, however , do happen. Lateness or absence
can be excused if there is a valid reason. Illness, job interviews out of town, death in the family ,
conference attendance, inclement weather or accidents for commuters, etc., are valid reasons.
Valid Excuses:  Oversleeping, a term paper due, an exam to cram for , etc., are not valid reasons.
Ultimately , the instructor reserves the right to determine what constitutes a “valid reason” on a
case-by-case basis.
Proper Planning:  If you know you are going to be late or miss a class, please let the instructor   
and your teammates know , so that they may plan for your absence and make the best use of
their time.
Please refer to Student Rule 7   (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) in its entirety for information
about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
 
Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance
contributes to a student’ s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed
appropriate by the instructor .1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 12/15Please refer to Student Rule 7  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) in its entirety for information
about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to T itle IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more
than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the
student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) ).
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work
missed because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2  (https://student-
rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) ).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and
Student Conduct Code.  (See Student Rule 24  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule24/) ).
Students should submit excused absence documentation to the Canvas course  (Modules ->
Student Resources -> Excused Absence Documentation).
 
Commu nication Policy
We will use Canvas  (https://canvas.tamu.edu/) to post assignments, course resources, discussions,
and send announcements. It is your responsibility to check Canvas and pay attention to class
emails and announcements.  
 
Bring Your Own Device Policy
BYOD is an initiative in the College of Engineering where students are required bring their own
computing device to lecture and lab . You need to have a computing device with a headset,
microphone, and webcam. Y ou will also need stable internet access outside of lecture and lab. See
the BYOD webpage  (https://engineering.tamu.edu/easa/areas/academics/byod) for information on
the program, approved devices, and financial assistance. BYOD devices fulfill the requirements for
this class.
 
Purchases and Reimbursements
Accurate Forms:  Please ensure that purchase order (PO) forms submitted to the department are
accurate. Submitting a PO with incomplete specifications or backordered items increases the
workload for our accounting staf f and causes unnecessary delays to your team. Submitting an
incomplete PO will result in the team being prevented from submitting additional POs; and all
additional purchases will have to be made by team members themselves and will be reimbursed
at the end of the semester .1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 13/15In-Stock Items:  Please verify that items are in stock before submitting a PO, and provide
alternative vendors if an item is likely to go out of stock (e.g., if the vendor only has a few units
left). If you suspect that a critical item may become backordered, it may be better if you purchase
it directly since POs may take several days to go through.
Reimbursements Deadline:  Reimbursement requests are due at the time of final deliverables.
To minimize overhead on our accounting staf f, we will only reimburse up to five purchase orders
(of your choice); this policy also encourages teams to plan their purchases in advance. Overnight
or express delivery will not be reimbursed unless approved in advance by the instructor .
Reimbursement of sales taxes is not allowed by the university; please make sure to bring tax-
exempt forms with you whenever you make local purchases (or purchases within the state).
Equipment Return:  The equipment and materials that you purchase do not belong to you, they
belong to T exas A&M University . Before you will be given a final grade in the course, all
equipment and materials must be returned.
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor .
If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’ s work,
should the instructor request it, may be suf ficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case”
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20  (https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu/Rules-and-
Procedures/Rules/Honor-System-Rules) ).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Of fice Rules and Procedures, academic integrity ,
and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor .tamu.edu  (https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu/) .
All suspected academic misconduct is taken seriously and will be reported to the Aggie Honor
System Of fice.
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a
disability , please contact Disability Resources of fice on your campus (resources listed below).
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory , physical,
or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with
Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 14/15Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or visit
disability .tamu.edu  (https://disability.tamu.edu/) .
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Conﬁdentiality
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and
stalking.
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including
full and part-time faculty , staf f, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory
Reporters and must report to the T itle IX Of fice if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes
aware of an incident that meets the following conditions  (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1
(https://rules-saps.tamu.edu/PDFs/08.01.01.M1.pdf) ):
The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.
The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University .
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention –
including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper , class
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in
most instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be able to control how the
report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The University’ s goal is to
make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the
resources you need.
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an
appointment with Counseling and Psychological Services  (https://caps.tamu.edu/) (CAPS).
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the
Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’ s Title IX webpage
(https://titleix.tamu.edu/) .
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a
student’ s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy
self-care by utilizing available resources and services on your campus.1/19/22, 4:50 AM Syllabus: 22 SPRING CSCE 482 934: SR CAPST ONE DESIGN
https://canvas.tamu.edu/courses/129774/pages/syllabus 15/15Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services
(https://caps.tamu.edu/) (CAPS) or call the TAMU Helpline  (https://caps.tamu.edu/helpline/) (979-
845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24-hour emergency
help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800-273-8255) or at
suicidepreventionlifeline.org  (https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/) .
 
