Course S yllabus
CSCE 482-932, Senior Capstone Design
Instructor Tracy Hammond, TA Adrita Anika
Course Ov erview
Effective design requires identifying the “right” problem to solve, building components that meet that
problem’s needs, and integrating components into a single solution system.  As problems become more
challenging, solid design, follow through, and teamwork skills become necessary to developing a
solution.  Every computer scientist and computer engineer who wants to work on big problems must
have these skills.
After this course, you will be able to:
●
analyzea complex computing problem andidentifysolutionsusing computing principles,
●
design, implement, and evaluatea computing-basedsolution to meet a given set of requirements,
●
applycomputer science theory and software developmentfundamentals toproduce
computing-based solutions,
●
collaborateeffectively as a member of a team,
●
recognizeprofessional responsibilities, both legaland ethical, andmake informed judgementsin
computing practice, and
●
communicateeffectively.
You will work in groups of 4-5 people to complete a significant engineering design project.  Every project
requires complete implementation, documentation, evaluation, and demonstration of a computing
system design. The focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, management
process, and teamwork.  At the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentation
describing and demonstrating their work.
This course offers you a unique learning experience.  The TA and I are always especially excited to teach
this course, and here is why:
●
You finally get to combine everything that you have learned throughout your entire
undergraduate curriculum.This not only includes thecomputer science skills you have gained,
but also the professional, cultural, and communication skills that you have developed.
●
This is an opportunity for you to try to solve a problem that matters to you.This course gives
you a lot of freedom and choice in your semester-long project. This course can be the first step
towards moving to the career of your choice.
●
Building a system from start to finish is fun and rewarding.Students often tell me that this was
the greatest experience of their entire college career.
●
Working on teams can be messy, but it’s worth it.It is amazing what you can accomplish
together, so much more than on your own.  Working on real problems with real people has its
challenges, but it is also very rewarding when you successfully complete your goals.
●
Every semester is different, every team is different, every solution is different.There is always
something new to learn and innovate.
●
Smaller class sizes and weekly meetings allow you to connectwith your classmates and your
instructor.
Page1of15
Course S yllabus
Course Expectations
Inclusion Statement
In this class, we are committed to a culture of inclusivity. We reject and condemn all forms of racism,
discrimination, brutality, and violence. We actively promote diversity and inclusion within our field not
limited to race, ethnicity, religion, disability, age, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation. Thus, we are
united in our condemnation of racism and any form of injustice. As Martin Luther King Jr. said, “Injustice
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” If any student wishes to discuss anything regarding
inclusivity within the classroom, especially anything contrary to this statement that you have
experienced, you are encouraged to contact the TA or instructor.  We also endeavor to make the course
materials themselves inclusive and accessible, and we encourage you to contact the TA or instructor if
you have any concerns or questions regarding class materials.
About Working in Teams
Because your teammates' grades are so tightly coupled with your own dedication to the class, many of
the assignments and rules are put in place to protect you and your teammates. These include
requirements to participate actively in class, complete assignments in a timely manner, keep the video
on with your face visible in virtual meetings, and treat your classmates and instructors with respect.
CSCE 482 is a project-oriented course aimed at developing system integration skills. You will work in
groups of 4–5 people to complete a significant software design project. Every project requires you to
complete implementation, documentation, evaluation, and demonstration of a software system. The
focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, management process, and
teamwork.
Each team is required to accommodate the following:
●
Time Management:Manage its own efforts to completeits project in a timely manner. You are
graded based on both the quality of the group product and their individual contributions.
●
Scheduled Meetings:Schedule a weekly meeting withthe course instructor and the TAs during
the official class hours. These meetings must be attended by every group member. Since the
projects will be student managed, the exact nature and style of these meetings is at the group’s
discretion, e.g., division of tasks among group members.However, every member of the group
is expected to participate in these meetings
 
.
At the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentation describing and demonstrating
their work. These presentations are open to the university community.
Page2of15
Course S yllabus
Online Elements
We will use Canvas for course materials, assignments, and communication. While most materials and
assignments will be handled online, the class itself will be held in-person and synchronously, which
means you are required to be present and active during all classes and all class times. If remotely
attending for an approved reason, we will require attendees to have your video on with your face visible.
Attendance Policy
Students required to quarantine or self-isolate should still participate in courses and course-related
activities remotely and must not attend face-to-face course activities. Students under quarantine or
self-isolation are expected to participate in courses and complete graded work unless they have
symptoms that are too severe to participate in course activities. Instructors teaching courses delivered
only face-to-face should work closely with students who are in quarantine or self-isolation to ensure the
student keeps up with the work.
Students experiencing personal injury or illness that is too severe for the student to attend class qualify
for an excused absence (seeStudent Rule 7, Section7.2.2). To receive an excused absence, students
must comply with the documentation and notification guidelines outlined in Student Rule 7. While
Student Rule 7, Section 7.3.2.1, indicates a medical confirmation note from the student’s medical
provider is preferred, please be understanding as not all illnesses may require a visit to a physician,
especially during this time.
●
Importance of Attendance:Not attending weekly meetingsharms the other members of your
group and makes it much more difficult for the instructor to assess your contributions to the
group effort. Therefore, attendance, punctuality and active participation in the weekly meetings
are required. Due to the unfortunate consequences and undue burden your frequent absences
would have on the rest of the team,more than 5 unexcusedabsences is an automatic failure.
●
Video Presence:If you are attending this class online,then you are required to have your video
showing your face. Just as it is not appropriate to attend a face-to-face class with a blanket over
your head, it is not appropriate to attend class with your video off. If you need to use a bio break
or step away briefly, you will need to communicate this with your team as long as an estimate
when you will return. This class has a significant communication component, and facial
expressions are vital to communication. We understand that you may have a “bad hair day” or
some other reason that you will need to keep your video off, and those are completely fine. Just
note thathaving your video off will count as oneof your unexcused absences.
●
Absence and Tardiness:Failure to attend a meetingor late arrivals (more than 10 minutes late)
will be reflected in your individual grade. Emergencies, however, do happen. Lateness or absence
can be excused if there is a valid reason. Illness, job interviews out of town, death in the family,
conference attendance, inclement weather or accidents for commuters, etc., are valid reasons.
●
Valid Excuses:Oversleeping, a term paper due, anexam to cram for, etc., are not valid reasons.
Ultimately, the instructor reserves the right to determine what constitutes a “valid reason” on a
case-by-case basis.
●
Proper Planning:If you know you are going to be lateor miss a class, please let the instructor
 
and your teammates know,
so that they may plan foryour absence and make the best use of
their time.
Page3of15
Course S yllabus
Student Expectations:
You are expected to:
●
Always use your @tamu.edu e-mail account to send correspondence between yourself and the
teaching team. Check your @tamu.edu email account daily.
●
Use your Canvas account (canvas.tamu.edu) to access course information, assignments, and your
grades.
●
Be an active problem solver, contributor, and discussant in lecture and lab.
●
Be prepared and accountable for both lecture and lab by reading the assigned material ahead of
time and be able to answer simple questions over said material.
●
Be held accountable for all assigned material that is, or is not, explicitly discussed in class.
●
Have a public presence in the class.
●
Attend class as a community expectation.
Course Logistics
Course Time:11:30AM–2:30 PM (Lecture & Lab) on Tuesdays and Thursdays
Location:EABA 121
Credit Hours:3
Prerequisites:Senior classification; CSCE 315, CSCE 411, and two additional CSCE tracked
courses.
Instructor:Dr. Tracy A. Hammond
Office:EABC 103
E-Mail:hammond@tamu.edu
Office Hours:In person after class and online by appointment
TAs:Adrita Anika and Samantha J. Ray
Office:EABC 112C
E-Mail:Adrita:adrita.anika@tamu.edu; Sam:sjr45@tamu.edu
Office Hours:In person after class and online by appointment
Course Description
Senior Capstone Design is a project-based course to develop system integration skills for solving
real-world problems in computer science; a significant team software project that integrates advanced
concepts across computer science specializations; projects require design, implementation,
documentation and demonstration, as well as design methodology, management process and teamwork.
Special Designation: C (oral communication)
As per university requirements: 1) at least 35% of your grade will involve written or oral communications,
2) 70% of that 35% is based on individual (not group) writing or speaking, 3) at least 1250 words are
individually written, 4) feedback is provided to you to allow for revision of some amount of documents
or slides, 5) you have at least 5 minutes of individual public speaking.
To receive C credit for this course, you must pass the C component.
Page4of15
Course S yllabus
Course Objectives
To prepare you for engineering practice with a major design experience based on the knowledge and
skills acquired in earlier course work and incorporating engineering standards and realistic constraints
that include most of the following considerations: economic; environmental; sustainability;
manufacturability; ethical; health and safety; social; and political.
Expected Outcomes
It is expected that successful participation in the course will allow you to demonstrate:
1.Analyzea complex computing problem and toapplyprinciplesof computing and other relevant
disciplines to identify solutions.
2.Design, implement and evaluatea computing-based solutionto meet a given set of computing
requirements in the context of the program's discipline.
3.Communicateeffectively in a variety of professionalcontexts.
4.Recognizeprofessional responsibilities andmake informedjudgementsin computing practice
based on legal and ethical principles.
5.Collaborateeffectively as a member or leader of ateam engaged in activities appropriate to the
program's discipline.
6.Applycomputer science theory and software developmentfundamentals toproduce
computing-based solutions.
List of Topics
●
Designing engineering problems
●
Using project management tools, e.g.,  Gantt, Trello, Github, Jira, etc.
●
Undergoing ethics training: CITI
●
Writing project motivation and identifying needs
●
Conducting a literature review
●
Designing and communicating a user interface
●
Designing and running a user study
●
Analyzing and interpreting data
●
Communicating and summarizing results
●
Developing professional writing skills and writing technical reports
Textbook and/or Resource Materials
Required:Design of Everyday Things. Don Norman.(BasicBooks 2013). Available free online at TAMU
Libraries.
Recommended:
●
The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: a Leadership Fable.Patrick M. Lencioni. (Jossey-Bass, 2002).
Available free online at TAMU Libraries.
●
Design for Electrical and Computer Engineers. RalphFord and Chris Coulston. (McGraw-Hill
Science, 2007). Physical copy available at TAMU Libraries.
●
Technical material from the literature, manufacturers’ data sheets and user manuals.
Page5of15
Course S yllabus
ABET Accreditation
The program is evaluated every year through the ABET (Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology) accreditation process. This class is part of the holistic evaluation. ABET accreditation
provides assurance that a college or university program meets the quality standards of the profession for
which that program prepares graduates. Your degree is a significant achievement and perhaps the largest
investment you will make toward your future. The quality of education you receive makes a big
difference in your career success.
ABET accreditation:
●
Verifies that your educational experience meets the global standardfor technical education in
your profession.
●
Enhances your employment opportunities—multinationalcorporations require graduation from
an accredited program.
●
Supports your entry to a technical professionthroughlicensure, registration and
certification—all of which often require graduation from an ABET-accredited program as a
minimum qualification.
●
Establishes your eligibilityfor many federal studentloans, grants, and/or scholarships.
●
Paves the way for you to work globally, because ABETaccreditation is recognized worldwide
through international agreements, and many other countries’ national accrediting systems are
based on the ABET model.
In order for the department of Computer Science & Engineering to keep their accreditation, the students
must demonstrate their abilities in each of the above expected outcomes of this class. Each of those
skills will be evaluated by external industrial affiliate members during your final presentation.
Grading P olicy
The final grade you will receive in the class will bebased on points accumulatedduring the semester.
Thus, both continued progress (the process) and the quality of your product (and other deliverables) will
determine your grade. Although the bulk of your grade is based on the performance of your team,
individual performance will also be gauged. Unless otherwise noted on the syllabus or class calendar, all
assignments will be due before class on the due date. The following is the breakdown of the grading
policy.
Grade Sc ale
F < 60% 
≤
 D < 70% 
≤
 C < 80%  
≤
 B < 90% 
≤
 A
We make every effort to provide you with the opportunity to earn an A. We do not curve in this class.
Rather, we teach to mastery which means that we have clear expectations in terms of what you should
complete and what knowledge you should have obtained by the end of the course to succeed and to
earn an A. If you are taking this class, participate appropriately, resubmit and fix your work based on our
feedback, and work equitably with your team, you should get an A. You will have every opportunity to
earn an A, so at the end of the course an 89.9 is a B.
Grade Distribution
1.Daily Quizzes:3%
Page6of15
Course S yllabus
2.Peer Feedback:2%
3.Project Proposal:5%
4.Weekly Reports:5%
5.Reading Responses:5%
6.Poster Design and Presentation: 10%
7.Auxiliary Deliverables:5%
8.Project Testing:5%
9.IRB Materials:5%
10.User Study:5%
11.Final Presentation:20%
12.Final Deliverables:30%
-----------------------------------------------
TOTAL100%
Note that you will not receive a passing grade in the class if you do not have a tested working system
by the end of the semester. The lower weighted items will significantly help you succeed in your
higher-weighted items.
To repeat, while some of these sections might appear to have very low point values, they are crucial to
your later success in the higher point sections.
1. Daily Quizzes (3%)
Every class (including the first class) will start with a 10-minute quiz. The quizzes will include material
about your assignments, questions about your design choices, and knowledge that you should have
gained from your past computer science courses.  Research has repeatedly shown that the act of
quizzing imparts more knowledge than lecturing or studying. Thus, this not only lets us know where your
knowledge might be lacking so that we may be able to correct it within this class, but it also serves to
teach you the knowledge that you need to have. This course is your final course in your computer
science degree, and should provide you with the capability to put all of your skills together and
communicate those capabilities effectively.
2. Peer Feedback (2%)
Peer feedback is crucial. It is also important that your feedback is of high quality. You will be asked to give
feedback to your peers regularly throughout the semester. This includes feedback on their presentations,
their proposal ideas, and their written work.
3. Project Proposal (5%)
Initial Individual Proposal (1%), Final Individual Proposal (1%), Group Proposal
(3%)
This grading criteria focus on formulating iterations of potential project ideas that will eventually lead to
your team’s final project idea for the rest of the semester. You individually and your team separately will
use the feedback from these proposals to help define that final project idea. During each of these
proposal phases, you will give feedback to your classmates to help refine the ideas and potentially find
teammates with similar interests.
Page7of15
Course S yllabus
4. Weekly Reports (5%)
Team Updates (2%), Individual Updates (2%), Agile Project Management (1%)
This grading criteria will be based on your team’s ability to maintain the project on schedule. Each team
submits a weekly report as a group and individually, which should be incremental
 
. The group reports
should specifically address the following:
●
Minutes
 
 from the previous meeting agenda
 
 for the weekly meeting with the instructor and the
TA
●
Team’s accomplishments during this period. Accomplishments need to be measurable, e.g., “did
more research on such and such” is not an accomplishment, it is an activity (and a loosely
defined one).
●
Team’s goals
 
 for the following week
Both team and individual weekly reports are due at 11:59 PM on the Monday of each week starting on
Week 4. Reports are limited to one page and should be submitted according to the template provided in
the course website. The 
 
team leader will be responsible for submitting team reports and leading the
discussion during the weekly meeting. One of the team members, acting as a scribe
 
, will be responsible
for generating the meeting minutes throughout the semester.
5. Reading Responses (5%)
Book Readings (2%), Literature Review (3%): 10 breadth and 2 depth papers per
team member
This grading criteria supplement your project team’s work by accumulating the knowledge necessary to
design and develop your system through book chapter readings from The Design of Everyday Things by
Don Norman and from literature review readings related to your team project. Each team member is
expected to identify 10 relevant papers for their project and specify how they should be referenced in
their final report. These papers will be different for each team member (so that a team of 4 will have 40
papers to reference in their final report). Of these papers, each person will read two of these papers that
are especially relevant in depth and write a reading summary on those two papers. This requirement is
to ensure that you have a strong understanding of what relevant work exists.
6. Poster Design and Presentation (10%)
 
Poster Design & Updates (5%), CDR Midterm Presentation (2%), External Poster
Presentations (3%)
This grading criteria evaluate your team’s project progress in terms of its critical design in the mid-point
of the semester. Your midterm presentation will serve as a critical design review for your project. Your
team will demonstrate this progress through a poster design and corresponding in-class discussion of
your poster. Your poster will receive feedback from your instructors and peers that you must address in
order to receive credit. Additionally, at least one member of your team will present your poster at an
external poster presentation, e.g., Student Research Week, the Aggie Research Expo, the TAMU CSCE IAP
Spring meeting, or similar, to provide you with extra practice in communicating your work and
responding to external feedback.
Page8of15
Course S yllabus
7. Auxiliary Deliverables (5%)
CITI Training (1%) Gantt Chart (1%), User Stories (1%), References List: 50 papers
(1%), GitHub Management (1%)
This grading criteria focus on other assignment contents in the course that relate to your semester
progress in preparing your team project. Each team member is expected to commit to your GitHub
repository weekly, if not daily.
8. Project Testing (5%)
Your project must be evaluated in accordance with industry standards, so you need to test the technical
performance of your developed materials as your project goes on. You are expected to develop an
automatic test bed for your project. You should also have appropriate unit testing throughout your code.
This grading criteria evaluates the materials that you have taken, written, and conducted for preparing
for and executing the evaluation of your team project’s system.
9. IRB Materials (5%)
IRB Supplementary Documents (1%), Initial IRB Application (2%), Revised IRB
Application (2%),
In order to conduct an evaluation with human participants, e.g., a user study or a survey, you must have
an active IRB application with Texas A&M. This process involves writing recruitment materials, an
evaluation protocol, and a survey as well as any other materials as needed for your project’s evaluation
plan. Your team will prepare these evaluation materials throughout the semester, and must complete
these contents properly and timely to ensure sufficient time in completing the evaluation of your system.
10. User Study (5%)
User Studies (5%): at least 20 participants
This grading criteria evaluates the materials that you have taken, written, and conducted for preparing
for and executing the evaluation of your team project’s system. Your team will prepare these evaluation
materials throughout the semester, and must complete these contents properly and timely to ensure
sufficient time in completing the evaluation of your system. Note that completing this a user study is part
of the required final deliverables and it not optional, even if you prefer to abandon the 5%
11. Final Presentation (20%)
Oral Presentation (15%), In-Class Demo (5%)
This grading criteria evaluates the communication and demonstration of your team project’s system
through a presentation, which you will present to the instructors and to industry panelists on the reading
day before finals; and a live system demonstration, which you will present to the instructors in class.
12. Final Deliverables (30%)
Final Report (20%), Documentation & Coding (5%), Demo Video (5%)
This grading criteria evaluates the technical writing of your final outcomes through the final report and
through the document and coding of your system. Your final report will be critiqued on its thoroughness
and effectiveness in communicating key aspects of your system such as its motivation, approach,
evaluation, and engineering standard, while your documentation and coding will be critiqued on its
Page9of15
Course S yllabus
completeness to properly execute and understand the details of your system. The final deliverables
include: a) a video advertisement of your project, b) a live demo, c) a final updated poster, d) a final
updated PowerPoint slidedeck, e) fully documented code source, f) user manual, g) evaluation materials,
and h) a final project report with all of the required sections. All final deliverables must be submitted in
order to receive a grade for this section.
Final Deliverables
1.Team Drive files including the following (please organize into folders, e.g., Docs, Source,
Hardware, Media, References, Freeware, etc.)
a.Designs: code, schematics, data, data sheets, freeware software tools, etc.
b.Reports: proposal, weekly reports, final report (completed in Overleaf), and ALL
presentations
c.Audiovisual media: close-up pictures of your system 
 
and a high-quality video presenting
your project (including a system demo and a project description) for posterity (see
gallery in the course webpage for movie samples). Final video must be submitted to the
instructor
d.Presentation posters: in PDF and PPT format
e.Individual assignments: in PDF format
2.Final prototype in the assigned GitHub Repository, as well as any spare parts and supplies
3.Software install, to be demonstrated on several machines
NOTE 
: Grades will not be assigned until all project
deliverables have been turned in (see below), all
borrowed items (e.g., keys, books, equipment) have been returned to their proper location or their
owner, and the workstations in the lab have been thoroughly cleaned up. All team members are
required to be present at the time of the final delivery.
All final deliverables are dueon the last day ofclass at 11:59 PM (date in Canvas).
13. Peer Reviews
Each member of your project team will score and review the performance of your other team members
through periodic peer review forms throughout the semester. Your peer review responses will be
calculated with the instructors’ internal scores for adjusting each member’s overall semester score.You
must complete all of your peer reviews to get an A in the course.
14. Class Participation
The instructors will evaluate your attendance to meetings, participation in the discussions, and
contributions to the team.More than five (5) unexcusedabsences will lead to an automatic failure for
the course. Note that team days in which teams mayneed to work in a remote location to accomplish
certain assignments (e.g., presenting your work at a conference or SRW, interviewing experts, meeting
with mentors, accessing technologies outside of the classroom, etc.) do not count toward absences
providing they are approved by the instructor in advance, abide by the instructor’s requirements for
check in during course time, abide by any activity reporting requirements by the instructor, and
complete all assignments on-time relevant to that class time.
Page10of15
Course S yllabus
Late Work Policy
All assignments must be submitted to complete the course. Assignments will be considered late after
their given deadline but will be accepted. Late assignments will receive a grade reduction of 10% per day
late with a maximum reduction of 30%.
Purchases and Reimbursements
●
Accurate Forms:Please ensure that purchase order(PO) forms submitted to the department are
accurate. Submitting a PO with incomplete specifications or backordered items increases the
workload for our accounting staff and causes unnecessary delays to your team. Submitting an
incomplete PO will result in the team being prevented from submitting additional POs; and all
additional purchases will have to be made by team members themselves and will be reimbursed
at the end of the semester.
●
In-Stock Items:Please verify that items are in stockbefore submitting a PO, and provide
alternative vendors if an item is likely to go out of stock (e.g., if the vendor only has a few units
left). If you suspect that a critical item may become backordered, it may be better if you
purchase it directly since POs may take several days to go through.
●
Reimbursements Deadline:Reimbursement requests aredue at the time of final deliverables. To
minimize overhead on our accounting staff, we will only reimburse up to five purchase orders (of
your choice); this policy also encourages teams to plan their purchases in advance. Overnight or
express delivery will not be reimbursed unless approved in advance by the instructor.
Reimbursement of sales taxes is not allowed by the university; please make sure to bring
tax-exempt forms with you whenever you make local purchases (or purchases within the state).
●
Equipment Return:The equipment and materials thatyou purchase do not belong to you, they
belong to Texas A&M University.  Before you will be given a final grade in the course, all
equipment and materials must be returned.
Course Schedule
As aC (communication)course, you will be continuouslytaught, and be given experience practicing, how
to present their work professionally. This will occur during all of the weeks of the course.
Introduction to Senior Capstone Design: Weeks 1-3
You will learn how to identify and formulate an engineering problem, how to function effectively on
multi-disciplinary teams, how to communicate and place their work in the context of other work, how to
communicate the motivation, need, and ethical considerations for their system, and how to define
success in their projects.
Major Deadlines
Teams Finalized bythe end of the second class meetingof Week 2 (date in Canvas).
Finalized Project Proposal Dueat the beginning ofthe second class meeting of Week 4 (date in Canvas).
Page11of15
Course S yllabus
Project Design and Skill Development: Weeks 4-6
You will learn how to do project management, how to evaluate the success of their project, and how to
effectively evaluate their projects and create an evaluation plan according to their definition of success.
You will complete a literature review, user stories, Gantt charts, and paper prototypes. They will use
project management software such as GitHub and Trello. The groups and individual students will present
weekly updates on their project development progress.
Major Deadlines
Submit IRB Applicationby the end of the second classmeeting of Week 6 (date in Canvas).
Project Development: Weeks 7-11
The teams will learn how to communicate the user interface design and design choices and how to write
technical documentation. The teams will continue to make progress on their projects. There will
continue to be weekly reports, peer reviews, and in-class demonstrations. Additionally, teams will
continue to make iterative progress on their final reports.
Major Deadlines
Fully working systemby the end of the second classmeeting of Week 11 (date in Canvas).
Project Evaluation: Weeks 12-13
The teams will run and implement a user study to evaluate the success of their system. They will learn
how to analyze and interpret data from an experiment and how to communicate about the results of an
experiment. The course will shift focus to the teams continuing to make progress on their projects. There
will continue to be weekly reports, peer reviews, and in-class demonstrations. Additionally, teams will
finalize their final reports.
Major Deadlines
Fully evaluated systemby the end of the second classmeeting of Week 13 (date in Canvas).
Project Finalization: Week 14
The teams will learn how to think critically about the results and their implications and how to effectively
summarize their contribution. There will continue to be weekly reports, peer reviews, and in-class
demonstrations. Additionally, teams will finish preparing all of their final deliverables (see below).
Major Deadlines
Complete draft of their final deliverablesby theend of the second class meeting of Week 14 (date in
Canvas).
Page12of15
Course S yllabus
Project Presentations: Week 15
Senior projects will be presented to industry panelists.
Major Deadlines
Final Deliverables Due onthe last day of classby11:59pm (date in Canvas)
Final Presentations to IAP members onFinal ReadingDay (date in Canvas).
IMPORTANT DATES:
January 18 (Tue.) –First day of spring semester classes
January 24 (Mon.) –Last day for adding/dropping courses
March 07 (Mon.) –Mid-semester grades due
March 14-18 (Mon.-Fri.) –Spring Break
April 15 (Fri.) –Reading day (no class)
April 19 (Tue.) –Last day to drop classes (TAMU Q-drop)
May 03 (Tue.) –Redefined Day; attend Friday classes (our class does not meet)
May 04 (Wed.) –Industry Panel Presentations; Reading day (no class)
May 05-10 (Thurs.-Tues.) –Final Exams
Course Cop yrig ht
The materials used within this course are copyrighted.  These materials include, but are not limited to,
the syllabi, quizzes, exams, homework and labwork problems, online handouts, course videos, audio and
visual recordings of classes, etc.  Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to
copy or distribute these materials, unless permission is expressly granted.
University P olicies
Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed
appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer toStudent Rule 7in its entirety forinformation about makeup work, including definitions,
and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more
than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the
student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed
because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7,Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student
Conduct Code. (SeeStudent Rule 24.)
Page13of15
Course S yllabus
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work,
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case”
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and
your rights and responsibilities ataggiehonor.tamu.edu.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or
visitdisability.tamu.edu. Disabilities may include,but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and
stalking.
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full
and part-time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and
must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an
incident that meets the following conditions (seeUniversity Rule 08.01.01.M1):
●
The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.
●
The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention –
including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most
instances, you will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a
formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available
to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.
Page14of15
Course S yllabus
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment
withCounseling and Psychological Services(CAPS).
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX
investigation and resolution process on the University’sTitle IX webpage.
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self-care
by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS).
Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the
National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800-273-8255) or atsuicidepreventionlifeline.org.
COVID Statement
The Faculty Senate has added the following statement as an optional addendum to the Fall 2021 syllabus
as part of the university’s COVID response.
To help protect Aggieland and stop the spread of COVID-19, Texas A&M University urges students to be
vaccinated and to wear masks in classrooms and all other academic facilities on campus, including labs.
Doing so exemplifies the Aggie Core Values of respect, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by
putting community concerns above individual preferences. COVID-19 vaccines and masking — regardless
of vaccination status — have been shown to be safe and effective at reducing spread to others, infection,
hospitalization, and death.
Student Observances for Religious Holy Days
In accordance with Texas Education Code §51.911(b) and TAMU Student Rule 7: Attendance, students
shall be excused from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. For more information about excused
absences due to religious holy days, please visit the Dean of Faculties website at
dof.tamu.edu/rules/religious-observance.
Page15of15
