  Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 5 January 28, 2022  
Course Information  
 
Course Number:   CSCE 441  
Course Title:  Computer Graphics  
Section:  200, 500  
Time: Tue/Thu 12:45 pm -2:00 pm 
Location : ZACH 350  
Credit Hours:  3 
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor : Shinjiro Sueda  
E-Mail: sueda@tamu.edu   
Zoom: LINK  
Office Hours  (tentative) : 
• M 2p -3p, W 1p -2p TA: Libing Zeng  
E-Mail: libingzeng@tamu.edu   
Zoom: LINK  
Office Hours  (tentative) : 
• T 3p-5p, R/F 10a -12p Grader : Samraat Gupta  
 
Course Description  
 
Principles of interactive computer graphics; 2 -D and 3 -D rendering pipelines, including geometric object and 
view transformations, projections, hidden surface removal, and rasterization; lighting models for local and 
global illumination; hierarchical models of 3 -D objects; systems and libraries supporting display and user  
interaction.  
 
Course Prerequisites  
 
CSCE 221; junior or senior classification or approval of instructor.  
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
 
• Understand  the graphics pipeline and make use of a  basic implementation of the pipeline in modern 
hardware (and graphics li braries)  
• Apply coordinate transforms and affine transformations and understand the application of such 
transforms using a vertex shader  
• Apply basic geometric computations involving points, lines, planes, and triangles related to spatial 
queries  
• Develop  basic data structures to represent a mesh, including applying transforms and necessary data 
for shading  
• Implement basic  rasterization methods (algorithm, stage in the graphics pipeline, and relationship to 
fragment shaders)  
• Make use of  hierarchical animation  
• Create  local shading models (Phong, etc.)  
• Apply basic texture mapping  
• Implement basic  ray tracing  
• Be introduced to the application of more advanced computer graphics topics (including, rendering, 
animation, real time and visualization)  
• Practice translating mathematics into C/C++ programs  
   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 5 January 28, 2022  
Textbook and/or Resource Materials  
 
There is required no textbook for this class, since there are many online resources available. The following 
optional  text may be useful:  
• [OPTIONAL] Fundamentals of Computer G raphics 4th ed., CRC Press  
• [OPTIONAL] OpenGL Programming Guide 9th ed., Addison -Wesley  
 
We will be using  Campuswire  [CODE 3617] for: 
• Announcements  
• Discussions /help  
We will be using Canvas  for: 
• Assignment submission  
 
Grading Policy  
 
• 70%: 6 substantial programming assignments  (11.667 % each)  
• 10% Midterm exam  
• 20%: Final exam  
• You must obtain at least 50% on the final exam to pass the course.  
• You may optionally skip the midterm and make the final be worth 30% of the course grade.  
• Final course grades will be based on the following scale:  
A = [ 100, 90], B = (90, 80], C = (80,  70], D = (70, 60], F = (60, 0]  
 
Late Work Policy  
 
All assignments must be submitted on tim e. However, you get 6 free days for the entire semester which can 
be applied to any of the programming assignments. You do not need to explain why you are using the days —
these late days will be automatically applied to any late assignments. All assignments  are due at 23:59. The free 
days will be given out in increments of full days.  
 
Course Schedule  
 
The following schedule for the lectures and assignments may (and will) change —it is meant to serve as a basic 
outline of topics and schedule.  
 
Week 1  1/18 Introduction; Meshes   
1/20  
Week 2  1/25 Graphics Pipeline; Rasterization ; Z-buffering   
1/27  
Week 3  2/1 Linear Algebra Review; Transformation Matrices   
2/2 Assignment 1 due  
Week 4  2/8 Matrix Stacks ; Hierarchical Transforms   
2/10  
Week 5  2/15 GLSL; Colors   
2/17 Assignment 2 due  
Week 6  2/22 Transforming Normals; Lighting and Materials   
2/24  
Week 7  3/1 Camera; Projection ; Clipping; Culling; Viewport   
3/3 Assignment 3 due    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 5 January 28, 2022  
Week 8  3/8 Review   
3/10 Midterm  
 3/15  Spring Break   
3/17   
Week 9  3/22 Free-look Camera   
3/24   
Week 10  3/29 Texture Mapping   
3/31 Assignment 4 due  
Week 11  4/5 Ray Tracing   
4/7  
Week 12  4/12 Reflection/Refraction ; Spatial Data Structures   
4/14 Assignment 5 due  
Week 13  4/19 Heightfields ; Render -to-texture   
4/21  
Week 14  4/26 Deferred Rendering ; Cubemaps; Shadows   
4/28 Assignment 6 due 
Exam 
Week  5/10 (Tuesday ) 8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m. Final  exam  
 
University Policies  
 
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are 
expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes 
to a s tudent’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the 
instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, inclu ding definitions, and 
related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 
30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the stu dent and 
instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do. ”   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 5 January 28, 2022  
 
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. 
Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, should the 
instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an acad emic misconduct case” ( Section 20.1.2.3, 
Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. 
If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please 
contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or visit disability.tamu .edu. 
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or 
chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with Disability 
Resources and their instruct ors as soon as possible.  
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. 
University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based d iscrimination and sexual harassment, 
including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full and 
part-time fa culty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and must 
report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an incident that 
meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, w as (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class  assignment or paper, class discussion, 
email, text, or social media post.  Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most instances, a 
person who is subjected to the alleged conduct  will be able to control how the report is handled, including 
whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the 
range of options available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are e ncouraged to make an appointment with 
Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).   
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolu tion process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
 
   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 5 January 28, 2022  
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy  self-care by 
utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). Students who 
need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays 
and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention 
Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 