Human-Computer Interaction - CSCE 436 (Spring 2022)
Seminar + Studio combined class. In this class, you will learn various details of cutting-edge technologies and
prototyping techniques to make tangible computers for human-computer interaction. This class intends to
provide a general understanding of HCI theories, design principles, design & implementation techniques, then
to offer fundamental skills for prototyping to investigate users’ needs in product/system development.
Learning Outcomes
With the focus on a broad spectrum of technical HCI, student will be able to describe (1) fundamental HCI
principles and how they support the process of the new technology development, (2) the process of HCI
research from need finding to user evaluation, and develop (4) prototypes of digital/physical artifacts using
machines and tools– skill acquisitions for effective communication.
Instructor
Jeeeun Kim (
http://jeeeunkim.com/
)
Email:
Jeeeun.kim@tamu.edu
Office hours: Friday 10 am-12 pm
PETR 336 or via Zoom (tamu.zoom.us/my/jeeeunkim), otherwise by appointment.
Teaching Staff
Nahyun Kwon (TA, Co-Instructor)
Email:
nahyunkwon@tamu.edu
Zoom link:
https://tamu.zoom.us/j/7647927393
(979-422-1648)
Office hours: Tuesday 5 pm - 7 pm, via Zoom or by appointment.
Han Zhang (Grader)
Email:
zh89118877@tamu.edu
Himani Deshpande (Co-Instructor)
Email:
hdeshpande11@tamu.edu
Abul Al Arabi (Co-Instructor)
Email:
abulalarabi@tamu.edu
Logistics
F2F,
Synchronous
If you have tested positive for covid or need quarantine, please email the instructor, the class zoom link will be
provided to attend immediately.
Zoom recording of the lecture will be available through Canvas momentarily.
Class Time: Wednesday 4:10pm - 6:50pm
(We will start at 4:15pm for people who need some time for relocation)Course Website
For questions, assignments, activities, midterm/final submissions, communications:
https://csce436spring22.slack.com
Grading Policies
Scale
90-100
A
80-89
B
70-79
C
60-69
D
<60
F
Weight
Participation (class participation): 10%
Assignments + In-studio activities (Individual, unless specified): 30%
Midterm project* (Group project): 30%
Final project* (Group project): 30%
*project grading will be partly peer-reviewed (50%), and grader/TA graded. Breakdowns will be provided
in the
Class Slack (  
csce436spring22.slack.com)& Canvas
No written exam, no quiz
Deliverables
Assignment (Individual)t: HCI observation activities, interactive system design/prototyping practices, evaluation
techniques, peer-review critiques
Submit through the slack for
Open Curation
.
Always due by Tuesday 11:59 pm (CT) of the following week, unless specified.
Midterm 1: YouTube Video on the deployment of your flipped affordance
Final project: Prototype of your own interactive system/machine
invention
1.
Project website showcasing your work;
■
Introduction and Motivation: What important real-world issue does this solve?
■
Descriptions of system design/development processes
■
Photos of your prototype
■
Video of your usage scenario (walkthrough)
2.
Presentation of your final projectRequirements
●
No prerequisite,
I welcome all students with various
backgrounds
(CS/CE, EE, ME, Architecture,
Design, Material Science, etc.)
●
There will be a random selection of class activity presenters,
if you miss the class so miss the
presentation without notice, your final grade will be downgraded by one letter grade
●
Always bring something to sketch with
●
no texting/Facebooking/Instagramming during the class --
No exception
●
Be ready for heavy hands-on studio activities and projects; you will be likely to spend 3+ hours/week
●
This class will introduce a wide variety of topics in rapid prototyping and late-breaking interaction
technologies with VERY quick turnarounds. You don’t need to be a geek, but
you should become a
fast learner:
acquire new skills and self-advance
to the (semi)expert level with your investment.
●
Bring your own passion and motivation-- This course will help you build your portfolio & research
experiences with QUALITY, not your course credits with QUANTITY
Reading
Week 1:
■
Reflective Physical Prototyping through Integrated Design, Test, and Analysis
(UIST’06) by Björn
Hartmann, Scott R. Klemmer, Michael Bernstein, Leith Abdulla, Brandon Burr, Avi Robinson-Mosher,
Jennifer Gee
Week 2:
■
How Bodies matter: five themes for interaction desig
n
(DIS’06) by Scott R. Klemmer, Björn Hartmann,
and Leila Takayama
■
Organic User Interfaces & Tangible Interfaces
(Communications
of ACM) by Roel Vertegaal, Ivan
Poupyrev, Hiroshi Ishii
Week 3:
■
User Centered Design Process
by MIT CSAIL HCI
■
Needfidning Tools
by Stanford d. School
Week 4:
■
Integrating Craft Materials and Computation
by Glenn
Blauvelt, Thomas Wrensch, Michael Eisenberg
■
Middle tech: blurring the division between high and low tech in education
by Michael and Ann
Eisenberg
Week 5:
■
Creativity Support Tools
by Ben Shneiderman
Week 6:
■
What do Prototypes Prototype?
(In Handbook of Human-computer
interaction, 2nd ed.) by Stephanie
Houde, Charles Hill
■
Getting the Right Design and the Design Right: Testing Many Is Better Than One
by Maryam Tohidi,
William Buxton, Ronald Baecker, Abigail SellenWeek 7:
■
The Dark Side (Patterns) of UX Desig
n
by Colin Gray,
Yubo Kou, Bryan Battles, Joseph Hoggatt, and
Austin L. Toombs
Week8:
(Spring Break)
Week 9:
●
Reflective Physical Prototyping through Integrated Design, Test, and Analysis
by Björn Hartmann, Scott
R. Klemmer, Michael Bernstein, Leith Abdulla, Brandon Burr, Avi Robinson-Mosher, Jennifer Gee
Week 10:
●
The Case for Inclusive Design
by Microsoft
Textbook (Optional)
●
Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction
by Helen Sharp, Jennifer Preece, Yvonne
Rogers
●
Designing the User Interface
by Ben Shneiderman &
Catherine Plaisant
●
The Design of Everyday Things
by Don Norman
●
The Humane Interface: New Directions for Designing Interactive Systems
by Jef Raskin
Course Schedule
The schedule below is provisional, subject to change based on the progress.
Honors Students will be assigned in-depth project-oriented assignments, in addition to the below.
* Indicates part of your project milestone, which is a team submission: will not be graded as part of personal
assignments
Week
Class
type Lecture & Studio activities
Slide
Assignment
1
(1/19)Lecture
Course Intro: What’s HCI and Why?
This semester’s theme:
Improve Accessibility (#0) Sign up a
course
website
and create a
proﬁle picture
2
(1/26)Studio
Group formation & collective poster about the
team information
Warm-up exercise for paper prototyping (
Paper
pinhole camera
)(#1) Miroboard of team
poster*
(#2) Media (photo, video,
etc.) of a complete pinhole
camera
3
(2/2) Lecture
Interaction Design Principles
Discovery methods (Needﬁnding Studies)
/Understanding Users(#3) A video of aﬃnity
diagramming process and
ﬁnal aﬃnity diagram*
4
(2/9) Studio
Card sorting & observation analysis
Cardboard prototyping to
redeﬁne the interaction (#4) A video about your
cardboard machine
use-case story*
5
(2/16) Mid-term Project Interim Presentation
Case studies of ﬂipped norm
What are commons vs. what has been ﬂipped(#5) Complete
this form to
provide peer critiques
during the class
6
(2/23)Lecture
Special Seminar: Extended Reality
Dr. Kangsoo Kim, University of Calgary () Reﬂection note
7
(3/2) Studio
Prototyping methods and Iteration
Input & Output (#6) Complete
p5.js
challenges
8
(3/9) Low-ﬁdelity prototyping of an interactive system
High-ﬁdelity prototyping interactive UI using
p5.js (#7) Replicated wireframe
using low-ﬁ prototyping
tools (e.g., balsamiq)
(#8) 1 min. video of
complete interactive UI
3/16
No Class; Spring break
No assignment
9
(3/23)Lecture
+
StudioMid-term Project Presentation
Flip the norm and observe how people react (#9) Complete
this form
for peer-review
10
(3/30)Lecture
+
StudioSpecial Topics in HCI I: Human-AI Collaboration:
Crowdsourcing and Human-in-the-Loop (#10) Project website
template with Motivation
statement, detailed 5-week
milestone
11
(4/6) Individual Team meeting & feedback
(10min./team) No assignment
12
(4/13)Lecture
+
StudioSpecial Topics in HCI II: 3D/4D Printing for HCI
Application Design (#11) Complete this
challenge for 3D Modeling
13
(4/20)Lecture
+
StudioSpecial Topics in HCI III: Robotics and
Human-Robot Interaction (#12) Complete
this
challenge for programming
in 3D
14
(4/27) Final Project Presentation I
Final results, Example applications, Limitation (#13) Complete
this form
for peer-review
during the
class
15
Final week, No class; No ﬁnal exam
All projects materials are
due
Attendance Policy
See below attendance & makeup policies for detail.
Late Work Policy & Makeup
If an absence is excused, make an appointment with the instructor (jeeeun.kim@tamu.edu) for make-up work.
The subject and task will vary upon your absent assignment and deliverables. The make-up work must be
completed in a timeframe not to exceed 30 calendar days from the last day of the initial absence.
Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is
exempted from the late work policy. (See Student Rule 7.) Extensions/make-ups can be given 12 hours prior to
the deadline upon written/in-person request. 10 min. will be given as a grace period. Otherwise, 50% off from
the credit you got for that submission. If you have more than two late submission, your final letter grade will be
downscaled by one letter. All other submissions of a deliverable after the established deadline without prior
request constitutes late work.
Email Policy
Like many professors, I get a ton of emails. When you email me, please be sure that the question you ask
requires my answer in one or two short sentences. Otherwise, I put it back to respond with a full (long) context,
then unfortunately, may forget.
Slack message is a
better way to get my immediate response.
University Policies
Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are
expected to attend class and to complete all assignments. Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for
information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines. Makeup
Work Policy Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate
by the instructor.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and
related documentation and timelines. Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may
necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be
agreed upon by the student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed
because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2). Students who request an excused
absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked,
students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students
must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, should the instructor
request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case”(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
NOTE:
Faculty associated with the main campus in College
Station should use this Academic Integrity
Statement and Policy. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language and location
at their site.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If
you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact
Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or visit disability.tamu.edu.
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic
health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with Disability
Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
NOTE:
Faculty associated with the main campus in College
Station should use this Americans with
Disabilities Act Policy statement. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language
and location at their site.
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all.
University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual harassment,
including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and Stalking.
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full and
part-time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and must
report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an incident that meets
the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1):
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – including
but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class discussion, email, text,
or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most instances, you will be able to
control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The University’s
goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the
resources you need.
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment
with Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS). Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing
supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title
IX webpage.NOTE:
Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this Title IX and Statement
on Limits of Liability. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language and location
at their site.
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self-care
by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS).
Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m. on weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the
National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800-273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org.