SYLLABUS  
CSCE 110 Programming I  
Sections 596 - 599   
Spring 2022  
Instructor  
Ki Hwan Yum   
Office: 216 Peterson 
Phone:  
Email: yum at cse dot tamu dot edu  
 
Office Hours: M 11:00 am – 12:00 pm, R 1:00 pm – 2:00 pm, or by appointment 
   Zoom link: https://tamu.zoom.us/j/492102794  
 
Lectures: MWF 3:00 pm – 3:50 pm Online 
            Zoom link: https://tamu.zoom.us/j/709083349  
 
Labs:  
          Section 596 MW 8:00 am – 8:50 am   Zach 592 
          Section 597 MW 9:10 am – 10:00 pm   Zach 592 
          Section 598 MW 10:20 am – 11:10 am Zach 592 
          Section 599 MW 11:30 am –12:20 pm  Zach 595 
 
Teaching Assistant 
Prajwal Das 
Office Hours (online): TR 12:40 pm – 1:40 pm 
Link:  https://tamu.zoom.us/j/94806341298?pwd=QU9TNUVLSjNxbHc0NkJyYnBhTzM2Zz09  
Email: prajwaldas95 at tamu dot edu 
 
Peer Teachers 
Section 596  Irene Masabarakiza 
Section 597  Mohona Ghosh 
Section 598  Hunter Baker 
Section 599  Isabel Fernandez 
Visit https://engineering.tamu.edu/cse/academics/peer-teachers/current-peer-teachers.html  for 
detailed information 
 Course Description : This is an introductory course designed for any student interested in using 
computation to enhance their problem-solving abilities. No prior experience in programming is 
necessary. Students will use their problem-solving abilities to implement programs in Python. 
 
Learning Objectives  
- Develop a basic understanding of programming and the Python programming 
language. 
- See the value of programming in a variety of different disciplines—especially as it 
relates to your other college courses. 
- Appreciate the value of experimentation. 
- Be comfortable with the fact that there is more than one right solution to a problem. 
 
Course Material and Announcements 
- Class Lectures: The material that you will need for this class will be presented in the 
online class lecture. Thus, it is extremely important that you attend every class.  
- Canvas: Course announcements, lecture materials, and class handouts can be found 
on Canvas. You are responsible for consulting Canvas regularly for course updates.  
- Course Topics : The major topics that will be covered during the 15 week semester 
are as follows. Each topic will be explored with numerous in-class examples followed 
by practice with lab assignments.  
• What is programming? Why is it important?  
• Simple Input/Output (input, print)  
• Variables and Expressions  
• Collective Data Structures (strings, lists, tuples, sets, dictionaries)  
• Decision-making Statements (if, if/else, if/elif/else)  
• Repetition / Loops (while, for)  
• Randomness  
• Functions  
• Simulation  
• File-processing 
• Binary numbers  
• Visualization (turtle)  
 
Required text : There is no textbook for this course. However, there are many good references 
that are available online that you may find helpful while studying the material.  
• Think Python 2nd Edition by Allen B. Downey  
http://greenteapress.com/wp/think-python-2e/   
• Fundamentals of Python First Programs 2nd Edition by Kenneth A. Lambert 
 
Also check https://www.facultybookshelf.org/course/24496  
  Attendance Policy : Attendance at all lectures is required to ensure that each student is abreast of 
the informational content of the class and becomes aware of any changes to the tentative class 
exam, quiz, and assignment schedules as noted later in this document. Absence from a lecture is 
not a valid excuse to be misinformed about any class activity and the student maintains the 
responsibility for all course content. Attendance at lectures/labs will constitute 5% of your final 
grade. 
 
Scholastic Dishonesty : Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated in any form. Working together 
on programming assignments can be a meaningful and real-world learning experience, BUT the 
final product submitted for a grade must be the work of the individual student submitting the 
material. Examinations are meant to measure the knowledge of individual students and offering to, 
or receiving any assistance from, a student that subverts this process will not be tolerated. Any 
identified incident of scholastic dishonesty will be dealt with severely and consequences may 
include a zero grade for the activity, course failure or dismissal from the university among others.  
Grading Policy:   
  
Course Grading  
1 Midterm  15%  
9 Programming Assignments  30%  
Attendance  5%  
Final exam  20%  
5 Homeworks  20%  
5 Quizzes  10%  
  
Exams:   
Midterm: Wednesday, March 2, 2022.   
Final: TBA  
 
Only with an officially approved university authorized absence will any exam makeup be 
considered. Prior arrangements with the instructor must be made when feasible and official 
verification of circumstances necessitating the absence will be required. One midterm and one 
comprehensive final will be given during the semester. Note that exams are extremely important. 
If you miss an exam (e.g. midterm), your final grade will be an ‘F’. 
  
Assignments :   Programming assignment grades will cumulatively represent 30% of your final grade. 
Programming assignments should be submitted on or before the due date. Programming 
assignment grades will lose 25% for each day after the due date. Assignments will require use of 
standard programming style conventions and documentation which will be illustrated in lab and 
lecture examples.   
 
Final Grades: 
Final grades will be assigned as follows:   
90-100 A   
80-89 B   
70-79 C   
60-69 D   
Below 60 F  
  
This scale may be adjusted by the instructor to reflect score variations.  
 
Academic Integrity Statement 
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an 
instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the 
work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to 
authenticate one’s work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an 
academic misconduct case” (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).  
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic 
integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy 
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for 
all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may 
have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed 
below) Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, 
sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible. 
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or visit 
disability.tamu.edu . 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness 
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that 
influence a student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage 
in healthy self-care by utilizing available resources and services on your campus. Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS) 
or call the TAMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours 
on weekends. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention 
Hotline (800-273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality 
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and 
productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based 
discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic 
violence, dating violence, and stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees 
(including full and part-time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are 
Mandatory Reporters and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, 
observes, or becomes aware of an incident that meets the following conditions (see University 
Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
 The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
 The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of 
the incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the 
University.  
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their 
attention – including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or 
paper, class discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must 
file a report, in most instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be able to 
control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The 
University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you and to 
ensure access to the resources you need. 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an 
appointment with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).  
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating 
the Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
 
 
Campus Safety Measures   
 
To help protect Aggieland and stop the spread of COVID-19, Texas A&M University urges 
students to be vaccinated and to wear masks in classrooms and all other academic facilities on 
campus, including labs.  Doing so exemplifies the Aggie Core Values of respect, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by putting community concerns above individual preferences. 
COVID-19 vaccines and masking — regardless of vaccination status — have been shown to be 
safe and effective at reducing spread to others, infection, hospitalization, and death. 