  Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 5 
Course Information  
 
Course Number:  CSCE 222  
Course Title:  Discrete Structures for Computing  
Section:  599 
Time:  MWF 01:50 PM – 02:40 PM 
Location:  ONLINE  
Credit Hours: 3  
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:  Qin Huang  
Office:  PETR 4 45 
Phone:  979-402-6216  
E-Mail:  huangqin@tamu.edu  
Office Hours: will be posted on Canvas  
 
Course Description  
 
Provide mathematical foundations from discrete mathematics for analyzing computer algorithms, for 
both correctness and performance; introduction to models of computation, including finite state 
machines and Turing machines . 
 
Course Prerequisites  
 
MATH 151  
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
 
The course will allow students to understand the relationships between logic, proofs and sets, and apply 
results from discrete mathematics to analysis of algorithms.  Students will be able to produce proofs and 
apply counting techniques. They will have a basic understanding of models of computation.  
 
Textbook  and/or Resource Materials  
 
Discrete Mathematics and  Its Applications, 8 Edition, Kenneth H. Rosen, McGraw Hill Education.  
 
Campuswire ( https://campuswire.com/p/GFD9B2B2C ): 
All questions will be fielded through Campuswire.  
• Everyone can see answers and other students can answer as well.  
• You may post to the entire class, or to instructors and TAs only  
o Email messages are more likely to be overlooked and should be used only in rare  
circumstances.  
Join the course and use code 5442.    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 5 
Grading Poli cy 
If you want to challenge any grading, you must do so within one week of when the grade is published.  
We reserve the right to audit the grades for any assignments submitted to this course. During the audit 
process, we can decrease or increase your score. This could result in lowering the score of already  
released grades.  
Letter grades will be assigned as follows:  
90-100 A  
80-89   B or better  
70-79   C or better  
60-69   D or better  
<60       F or better  
Exams  (50%)  
• One midterm (20%).  
• Final exam (30%).   
Exams are open book, open note.  
• You are allowed  
o to use your textbook.  
o any instructor’s slides and examples.  
• You are not  allowed  
o to interact with anyone face to face or electronically during an exam.  
Homework (50%)  
Written assignments are handed out every one or two weeks. A subset of each homework will be 
graded for correctness. The other problems will be graded for completeness only.   
The number of homework assignments is indeterminate (you cannot as sume there will be a certain 
number).   
• You must write your individual homework independently.  
• You are not  allowed to interact with other students currently taking the course or those who have 
taken the course before.  
• You are allowed  
o to use your textbook.  
o any instructor’s slides and examples.  
o to get help from the grader and instructor.     Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 5 
 
Late Work Policy  
 
Submission of late assignments and scheduling of make -up exams should be arranged before the due 
date.  
 
Course Schedule  
 
Week  Topic  
1 Logic and proofs  
2 Sets 
3 Functions  
4 Sequences and sums  
5 Algorithms and complexity  
6 Induction and recursion  
7 Counting  
8 Permutations and combinations  
9 Generalized permutations and combinations  
10 Recurrence relations  
11 Generating functions  
12 Inclusion -exclusion  
13 Relations  
14 Models of computation  
 
University Policies  
 
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a s tudent’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropriate by the instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, inclu ding definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 5 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, ch eat or steal, or tolerate those who do. ” 
 
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. St udents must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your ed ucation due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or 
visit disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities may include, b ut are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Title I X and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual 
harassme nt, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assis tants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 5 
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class 
discu ssion, email, text, or social media post.  Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct  will be able to control how the report is 
handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal in vestigation. The University’s goal is to make sure 
you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).   
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing suppor tive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health an d wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self -
care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). 
Stud ents who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org . 