  Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 1 of 5 
 
Course Information  
 
Course Number:  CSCE 433 / CSCE 627   
Course Title:  Formal Languages and Automata / Theory of Computability   
Section:  500 / 600  
Time:  MWF  11:30 AM  – 12:20 PM  
Location:  HRBB 113  
Credit Hours:  3 / 3  
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:  Prof. Jianer Chen   
Office:  PETR 428  
Phone:  979-845-4259  
E-Mail:  chen@cse.tamu.edu  (best way to contact)  
Office Hours:  MWF  10:30 – 11:30 PM; other times by appointment  
 
Teaching Assistant:  XXX YYYY  
E-Mail:  xxyy@tamu.edu  
Office Hours:  ??; other times by appointment  
 
Course Description  
 
CSCE 433:  Basic types  of abstract languages and their acceptors; the Chom sky hierarchy; solvability and 
recursive function theory; application of theoretical results to practical problems.  
CSCE 627:  Formal models of computation such as pushdown automata; Turing machines and recursive 
functions; unsolvability results; complexit y of solvable results.  
 
Course Prerequisites  
 
CSCE 433:  CSCE 315 or approval of instructor.  
CSCE 627:  Catalog states CSCE 433, but this is not necessary.  
For both courses, the actual prerequisite is a basic class in data structures and algorithms, such a s CSCE 
221 or equivalent, and a basic class in discrete mathematics, such as CSCE 222, MATH 302 or equivalent.  
 
Special Course Designation  
 
This is a stack ed course.  Exams  and homeworks will be customized with some parts only for CSCE 433 
students and som e parts only for CSCE 627 students.  
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
 
The course goals are (1) to introduce you to the theoretical foundations of computer science concerning 
the relationships between languages and machines, the inherent limits of what can be computed, and 
the inherent efficiency of solving problems; (2) to f amiliarize you with the applications of these   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 2 of 5 
theoretical topics to practical problems; and (3) to increase your ability to recognize and create rigorous 
mathematical arguments.  
 
Textbook and/or Resource Materials  
 
Textbook :  
Michael Sipser (2013),   
Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Third Edition ,  
Cengage Learning, 2013.  
Errata list is here:  https://math.mit.edu/~sipser/itoc -errs3.1.html  
Learning management system:  We will use Canvas (canvas.tamu.edu) for posting class information, 
assignment turn -in, grades, and question -and-answer.  
 
Grading Policy  
 
Your grade will be based on these components:  
• Grading Scale:  A = 90 -100%, B = 75 -89%, C = 65 -74%, D = 60 -64%, F = 0 -59%.  
• The cour se has 6 homework assignments, two midterms, and a final exam.  
• Homework assignment: 3 6%, Midterms: 15% each, Final exam: 3 4%.  
 
Academic Integrity  
 
Discussion of concepts with others is encouraged, but all assignments must be done on your own, unless 
othe rwise instructed.  If you use any source, you must reference it, whether it be a person, a paper, a 
book, a solution set, a webpage or whatever.  You must write up the assignments in your own words.  
Copying is strictly forbidden.   
 
Late Work Policy  
 
The assignments are due on the designated due dates at the beginning of class. No late submissions will 
be accepted . Discuss unusual circumstances in advance with the instructor. Make -up assignments will 
only be available for university -excused absences; s ee Student Rule 7, Attendance (  http://student -
rules.tamu.edu/rule07 ).   
 
Course Schedule  
 
Week of  Lecture  Topic  Textbook  
  1:  Jan 19 -21 Math ematics  foundation, proof techniques  Chap 0  
  2:  Jan 24-28 Automata theory, finite automata  Chap 1  
  3:  Jan 31 -Feb 4  Nondeterministic finite automata  Chap 1  
  4:  Feb 7 -11 Regular languages, closure properties  Chap 1 
  5:  Feb 14 -18 Non -regular languages, pumping lemma, midterm 1  Chap 1 
  6:  Feb 21 -25 Context -free languages (CFLs)  Chap 2  
  7:  Feb 28 -Mar 4  Pushdown Automata, pumping lemma for CFLs  Chap 2  
  8:  Mar 7 -11 Closure Properties for CFLs, Deterministic CFLs  Chap 2    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 3 of 5 
  9:  Mar 14 -18 Spring break   
10:  Mar 21 -25 Computability theory, Turing Machines  Chap 3 
11:  Mar 28 -Apr 1  Decidability  Chap 4 
12:  Apr 4 -8 Midterm 2, r educibility  Chap 5 
13:  Apr 11 -15 Reducibility (cont.)  Chap 5 
14:  Apr 18 -22 Complexity theory, NP -completeness  Chap 7  
15:  Apr 25 -29 NP-completeness (cont.) , space complexity  Chap 7, 8 
16:  May 2, 3  Space Complexity  (cont.) , Intractability  Chap 8, 9  
 
Exam and Homework Dates:   
Midterm 1: Friday,  Feb 18 (taken in class )  
Midterm 2: Monday,  Apr 4 (taken in class ) 
Final Exam: Tuesday , May 10, 10:30 AM – 12:30 PM  
Homework Due Dates: will be given in the homework assignment handouts  
 
University Policies  
 
Attendance Policy  
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to com plete all assignments.  
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Makeup Work Policy  
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropriate by the instructor.  
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
“The instructor is under no obli gation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
“An Aggie does not lie, ch eat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. St udents must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work,   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 4 of 5 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehon or.tamu.edu . 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a  
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or 
visit disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental  
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality  
Texas  A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual 
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the em ployee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless o f how the information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class 
discussion, email, text, or social media post.  Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, you will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a 
formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options 
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you  need.  
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).   
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessin g supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental h ealth and wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self -
care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAP S). 
Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 5 of 5 
COVID -19 Temporary A ddendum  to Minimum Syllabus Requirements  
The Faculty Senate temporarily added the following statements to the minimum syllabus requirements 
in Spring 2021  as part of the university’s COVID -19 response.  
 
Campus Safety Measures  
To promote public safety and protect students, faculty, and staff during the coronavirus pandemic, 
Texas A&M University has adopted policies and practices for the Spring 2021  academic term to limit 
virus transmission. Students must observe the following practices while participating in face -to-face 
courses and course -related activities (office hours, help sessions, transitioning to and between classes, 
study spaces, academic se rvices, etc.):  
• Self-monitoring —Students should follow CDC recommendations for self -monitoring. Students 
who have a fever or exhibit symptoms of COVID -19 should participate in class remotely if that 
option is available, and should not participate in face -to-face instruction.  
• Face Coverings —Face coverings  (cloth face covering, surgical mask, etc.) must be properly worn 
in all non -private spaces including classrooms, teaching laboratories, co mmon spaces such as 
lobbies and hallways, public study spaces, libraries, academic resource and support offices, and 
outdoor spaces where 6 feet of physical distancing is difficult to reliably maintain. Description of 
face coverings and additional guidance  are provided in the Face Covering policy  and Frequently 
Asked Questions (FAQ)  available on the Provost website . 
• Physical Distancing —Physical distancing must be maintained between students, instructors, and 
others in course and course -related activities.  
• Classroom Ingress/Egress —Students must follow marked pathways for entering and exiting 
classrooms and other teaching spaces. Leave classrooms promptly after course activities have 
concluded. Do not congregate in hallways and maintain 6 -foot physical distancing when waiting 
to enter classrooms a nd other instructional spaces.  
• To attend a face -to-face class, students must properly wear an approved face covering If a 
student refuses to wear a face covering, the instructor should ask the student to leave and join 
the class remotely. If the student do es not leave the class, the faculty member should report 
that student to the Student Conduct office  for sanctions. Additionally, the faculty member may 
choose to teach that day’s cl ass remotely for all students, or dismiss the class in the case of a 
traditional face to face lecture.  
 
Personal Illness and Quarantine  
Students required to quarantine must participate in courses and course -related activities remotely , if 
that option is a vailable, and must not attend face -to-face course activities . Students should notify their 
instructors of the quarantine requirement. Students under quarantine are expected to participate in 
courses and complete graded work unless they have symptoms that a re too severe to participate in 
course activities.   
Students experiencing personal injury or Illness that is too severe for the student to attend class qualify 
for an excused absence (See Student Rule  7, Section 7.2.2 .) To receive an excused absence, students 
must comply with the documentation and notification guidelines outlined in Student Rule 7.  
 
 