Course Information   
Course Information   
Course Number:   CSCE221  
Course Title:   Data Structures and Algorithms  
Section:   517 - 520 
Time: Lec - MWF 12:40 pm to 1:30 pm/ Labs - MW 8:00 am to 12:20 pm  
Location:   ZACH 244/ZACH 596  
Credit Hours: 3  
Instructor Details   
Instructor:   Harpreet Singh Chawla  
Office:   L.F. Peterson Building, 2nd Floor  
Phone:    
E-Mail:   harpreetsc@tamu.edu  
Office Hours: Friday 2:00 pm - 4:00 pm or appointment by email  
Course Description   
Specification, analysis and implemen tation of abstract data types for lists, stacks, queues, 
trees, hash tables, graphs, and their associated algorithms. Performance trade -offs of 
different implementations; asymptotic analysis of running time and memory usage. Includes 
the execution of stude nts programs written in C++; emphasis on adherence to good software 
engineering principles.   
Course Prerequisites   
 CSCE 121 " Introduction to Program Design and Concepts"  
 CSCE 222 " Discrete Structures " or MATH 302 " Discre te Mathematics " (at-least co -
requisite)  
Course Learning Outcomes   
At the end of this course students should be able to:  
1. Design and implement diverse data structures that allow easy access and manipulation 
of data using C++ programming language.  
2. Use the dat a structures to implement algorithms.  
3. Apply the Big -O asymptotic notation to analyse and select an efficient algorithm for 
solving a given problem with respect to runtime and memory usage.  
Textbook and/or Resource Materials   
 Recommended Textbooks:  
o “Data S tructures and Algorithm Analysis in C++”, 4th Edition, Mark A. 
Weiss, 2014, Pearson, ISBN -13: 978 -0132847377 or ISBN -10: 013284737X.  o “Data Structures and Algorithms in C++ 2nd Edition”, 2nd Edition, Michael 
T. Goodrich, Roberto Tamassia, David M. Mount, ISBN -13: 978 -0470383278 
or ISBN -10: 0470383275.  
o You may need a textbook on C++ language from the previous semester, or any 
good C++ reference book(s).  
 Slides used in the class/lectures.  
Grading Policy   
 Grading Scale: 90 -100 – A; 80 - <90 – B; 70 - <80 – C; 60- <70 – D; Below 60 – F.  
 There will be  
o 4 Assignments, each building upon the previous one. The 4 assignments 
together will make one course project.  
o Labs every week, managed by the TA(s) – Coding questions to solve in 50 
minutes. Take home if incomplete and submit for 20% of the points by the end 
of the day.  
o There will be two exams, a midterm and a final, both conceptual, multi -choice.  
o A quiz every week (1 hour, 10 points), based on the materials covered in the 
week.  
o Peer reviews of the pseudocode/algo rithm question of assignments.  
 4 Assignments – 35%; 15% Labs; 10% Peer Reviews; 25% - exams (10% midterm 
and 15% final); 15% Quizzes.  
Rubrics  Weightage (%)  Range of Marks  Grade  
Assignments  35 90 – 100 A 
Labs  15 80 – <90  B 
Midterm  10 70 – <80 C 
Final  15 60 – <70 D 
Quiz  15 < 60  F 
Peer Reviews  10     
  
Note about graded materials:  
 Assignments  – The first question will be about writing the pseudocode for the 
assignment (30%) (Unless stated otherwise). The next question will be about writing 
the corresponding code (50%), and an analysis of the time complexity of an algorithm 
(20%).  
o You ARE ALLOWED to discuss with your peers, but those discussions 
should be limited to logic and the concepts.  
o You ARE NOT ALLOWED to copy their solutions. We have tools that detect 
plagiarism, including similar code logic and program flow.  
o You MUST MENTIO N the names of the students you discussed the concepts 
with. There will be at least one name always there – of the student you did the 
peer review with. If there are other students with whom you discuss the logic, 
mention them. Note:  Your code will be chec ked for plagiarism against your 
peers and github repos we can locate that have similar codes on them.  o The pseudocode aspect of the assignment will be submitted and peer reviewed 
one week  from the doling out of the assignment. The submission date will be 
mentioned in the assignment. Changes can be made to the pseudocode based 
on peer reviews (if deemed appropriate by the student themselves) for final 
submission.  
o The code should have comments explaining the logic of the code. If there is 
any block of code tha t is doing something logical, briefly explain the logic for 
doing so, briefly (ideally in 2 – 3 sentences). Not doing so will lead to a 5% 
deduction from the coding section of the assignment.  
 Labs  – A coding assignment in the lab directed by the TA. If not  completed in the lab, 
complete it by the end of the day to receive partial credit (20%). If you collaborate 
with anyone (both in and out of the lab), mention it in the comments above the 
submitted code. All labs carry equal weightage.  
 Quiz  – A weekly quiz  to evaluate the understanding of the concepts, code and 
complexity analysis of the algorithms or data structures taught in the week.  
 Midterm/Final  – Questions testing the understanding of concepts. All multi -choice. 
One-third of the final will be based on  material covered before midterm.  
 Peer Review – Students will be reviewing each other’s pseudocode for each 
assignment (groups of 2, different for each assignment). An advice is to consult each 
other about the review that the students submit. They will com ment on:  
o The correctness of the pseudocode/algorithm.  
o How the pseudocode/algorithm could be improved.  
o And how the reviewee’s own pseudocode/algorithm either dealt with what the 
reviewer got wrong, and/or how the reviewee can fix mistakes in their 
pseudoco de/algorithm.  
Note:  The review should be about the logic, rather than focused on the syntax. Sound, good 
faith critiquing (even if incorrect) will receive full grade.  
Class Participation  – Peer -review and allowing discussions over the assignments and labs  
will test your interaction skills in the course. Peer -review will substitute for your class 
participation.   
Attendance  – Attendance is highly recommended, but not a graded component.  
Late Work Policy   
Unless a student has taken permission for submitting late, the following rules will apply:  
 We will follow a cumulative grading system . You can submit assignments late, but all 
the late days for each assignment will be tallied at the end of the semester. Th is also 
means that if you submit your assignment before the deadline, those number of days 
will be subtracted from your late days tally. This is to keep you motivated and not 
give up mid -way through the semester if you fall behind in any assignment, giving  
you room to make up for the lost time.  
 If in-spite of submitting any initial assignments late, ALL assignments are submitted 
before or on the deadline day of the 4th Assignment, no late penalty will be incurred.  
 Late day penalty: We will deduct 1.25 per e very late day from the final score of the 
assignments . That means, if the cumulative total of all assignments was 450/500 
(90%), for example, with a total of 10 late days, 12.5 will be deducted from 90 (totaling 77.5). In the final score, 77.5 will be cons idered for the 35% component of 
the grading scale instead of 90.  
 Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late 
work and is exempted from the late work policy. To understand the circumstances under 
which makeup wo rk or excused absences are allowed, please read Student Rule 7 . 
Course Schedule   
Google Drive link is shared with the class.  
Course Information Items   
Technology Support – We will be using:   
 Canvas - For Quizzes and uploading of assignments documents  
 Github - Push your submissions to your private repositories  
 Piazza - Join the Piazza course page for discussions regarding anything pertaining to 
the class. https://piazza.com/tamu/spring2022/csce 221517520/home  
University Policies   
This section outlines the university level policies. The TAMU Faculty Senate established the 
wording of these policies.  
 
Attendance Policy   
The university views class attendance and par ticipation as an individual student 
responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information abo ut excused absences, 
including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
Makeup Work Policy   
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when 
attendance contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stat ed in Student Rule 7, or other 
reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.  
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, including 
definitions, and rela ted documentation and timelines.  
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period 
of more than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be 
agreed upon by the student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). “The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up 
work missed because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and 
Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 ). 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy   
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an 
instructor. If  asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed 
the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to 
authenticate one’s work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient gr ounds to initiate 
an academic misconduct case” ( Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
Texas A&M at College Station  
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic 
integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu .  
Texas A&M at Galveston  
You can learn more about the Honor Council Rules and Procedures as well as your rights 
and responsibilities at tamug.edu/HonorSystem . 
Texas A&M at Qatar  
You can learn more about academic integrity and your  rights and responsibilities at Texas 
A&M University at Qatar by visiting the Aggie Honor System  website.    
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy   
Texas A&M Uni versity is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities 
for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you 
may have a disability, please contact Disability Resources office on your campus (r esources 
listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss 
their disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as 
possible.  
Texas A&M at College Station  
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or visit 
disability.tamu.edu . 
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (409) 740 -4587 or visit 
tamug.edu/counsel/Disabilities .  Texas A&M at Qatar  
Disability Services is located in the Enginee ring Building, room 318C or at +974.4423.0316 
or visit https://www.qatar.tamu.edu/students/student -affairs/disability -services.   
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Con fidentiality   
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and 
productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based 
discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, se xual exploitation, domestic 
violence, dating violence, and stalking.  
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees 
(including full and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are  
Mandatory Reporters and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, 
observes, or becomes aware of an incident that meets the following conditions  (see 
Univers ity Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
 The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the 
time of the incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an em ployee of 
the University.  
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their 
attention – including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment 
or paper, class discussion, email, text, or so cial media post. Although Mandatory Reporters 
must file a report, in most instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be 
able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal 
investigation. The Universi ty’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options 
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
Texas A&M at College Station  
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an 
appointme nt with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).  
 Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and 
navigating the Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University ’s Title IX 
webpage .  
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an 
appointment with the Counseling Office in the Seibel Student Center, or call (40 9)740 -4587. 
For additional information, visit tamug.edu/counsel .  
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and 
navigating the Title IX investigation and resolution process o n the Galveston Campus’ Title 
IX webpage . Texas A&M at Qatar  
Texas A&M University at Qatar students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting 
are encouraged to visit the Health and Wellness  website for more information.  
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and 
navigating the Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX 
webpage .  
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness   
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that 
influence a student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to 
engage in healthy self -care by utilizing available resources and se rvices on your campus.  
Texas A&M College Station  
Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services  
(CAPS) or call the TAMU Helpline  (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays 
and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Students who need someone to talk to can call (409) 740 -4736 from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
weekdays or visit tamug.edu/counsel  for more information. For 24 -hour emergency 
assistance during nights and weekends, contact the TAMUG Police Dept at (409) 740 -4545. 
24-hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline 
(800-273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
Texas A&M at Qatar  
Texas A&M University at Qatar students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting 
are encouraged to visit the Health and Wellness  website for more information.   
Campus Specific Policies   
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Classroom Access and Inclusion Statement  
Texas A&M University is committed to engaged student participation in all of its programs 
and courses and provides an accessible academic environment for all students. This means 
that our classrooms, our virtual spaces, our practices and our interactions are as inclusive as 
possible and we work to provide a welcoming inst ructional climate and equal learning 
opportunities for everyone. If you have an instructional need, please notify me as soon as 
possible.  
The Aggie Core values of respect, excellence, leadership, loyalty, integrity and selfless 
service in addition to civil ity, and the ability to listen and to observe others are the foundation of a welcoming instructional climate. Active, thoughtful and respectful participation in all 
aspects of the course supports a more inclusive classroom environment as well as our mutual  
responsibilities to the campus community . 
Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)  
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect t he privacy of educational records by limiting 
access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their 
educational records and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading 
data through informal and fo rmal hearings. Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold 
any or all directory information items may do so by going to howdy.tamu.edu  and clicking 
on the "Directory Hold Information" link in the Student Records channel on the MyRecord 
tab. The complete FERPA  Notice to Students  and the student records policy is available on 
the Office o f the Registrar webpage.  
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student’s social security 
number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this 
class to protect your privacy and to ensure confi dential treatment of information associated 
with or generated by your participation in the class.  
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local 
telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, p rogram of study 
(college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees honors and 
awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence 
location and medical residence specialization.  
 
 