Course S yllabus
Course Information
Course Number:VIST 477, VIZA 677, CSCE 446, CSCE650
Course Title:Virtual Reality
Time:Tuesday/Thursday 8am to 9:15am
Location:Langford C room 207
Credit Hours:3
Instructor Details
Professor:Jinsil Hwaryoung Seo
E-Mail:hwaryoung@tamu.edu
Office Hours:By appointment
Instructor:Brian Beams
E-Mail:brianmbeams@gmail.com
Office Hours:By appointment
Instructor of record:Emma McLauchlan
E-Mail:emma.mclauchlan@tamu.edu
Office Hours:By appointment
Teaching Assistant:Brett Dishongh
E-Mail:brett.michael29@tamu.edu
Office Hours:By appointment
Course Description
This course covers the theory and practice of virtual reality (VR). Virtual reality includes interactive 3D
virtual  environments that take advantage of immersive technology to provide enhanced perceptual
realism and an  embodied interaction experience. The course aims to provide an overview of VR with
topics including input  devices, output devices, 3D interaction techniques, augmented reality, the role of
realism in VR, navigation  techniques, design guidelines, and evaluation methods. Students will gain
hands-on experience designing VR  experiences emphasizing application, demonstration, or research
purposes.
For the final project in this course, students will be introduced to concepts in sustainability, and how to
use interactive technology to educate and inform people’s idea of sustainable practices in their own life
and society. Students will work on a series of individual activities as well as work as a team to create a
large-scale group activity, which will focus on the creation and analysis of interactive art projects in the
form of a fully realized VR project.
Page1of9
Course S yllabus
Course Prerequisites
Students are expected to have some experience with computer programming and 3D graphics tools prior
to  taking this course. While the course has no official prerequisites, recommended experience includes
topics  covered in courses such as VIST 271, CSCE 221, or CSCE 441. Students who are uncertain of the
expected  level of technical proficiency are encouraged to contact the instructor to discuss specifics.
Experience with  graphical and visualization tools, frameworks, and libraries (e.g., Unity, Unreal,
Processing, OpenGL) is recommended. Familiarity with concepts of human-computer interaction,
aesthetic design, and mathematical functions is also recommended, but experience with all is not
required.
Special Course Designation
This is  cross-listed and stacked which means it is both in department of Visualization and Computer
science and has both undergraduate and graduate students.
Course Learning Outcomes
•Produce interactive 3D virtual environments and 3D interaction techniques
•Develop immersive virtual reality applications with a team
•Characterize and describe virtual reality systems in terms of display properties and interaction
techniques
•Evaluate virtual reality applications in terms of design, purpose, benefits, and limitations
•Review and organize past and current virtual reality techniques and knowledge
•Analyze the response users have to your developed project
•Identify sources of information outside the classroom that can be helpful for the design problems and
technical problems presented in class.
•Analyze, critique, and present work in a productive and effective manner using appropriate
terminology.
Textbook and/or Resource Materials
Reading and viewing assignments will be given from articles and research papers that are available
through the  university. There is no required textbook for the course, but the recommended textbook will
complement the  topics covered in the course.
Recommended:
3D User Interfaces: Theory and Practice (2nd Edition). Joseph J. LaViola Jr., Ernst  Kruijff, Ryan P.
McMahan, Doug Bowman, Ivan P. Poupyrev. ISBN-10: 0134034325
Page2of9
Course S yllabus
Course Structure
Students enrolled in Virtual Reality (VIST 477, VIZA 677, CSCE 446, CSCE 650) will have both individual
and group activities. The individual activities  will be in the form of in-class presentations and writing
assignments which will inform, and be informed by, the group activities, which will be the backbone
of the course. The group activities will account for much of the work in the course.
Individual activities 20%
Exams 20%
Team Project 45%
Final Paper 10%
Peer Evaluation 5%
Total: 100
Individual Activities
Students will participate in individual activities that contribute to their ﬁnal grades. These are graded
separately from Group Activities. These will include:
●Quizzes and Exams
●In-Class Presentations
●Written Analysis of Readings and other materials
All individual activities will be weighted equally with each other.
Quizzes and Exams
There will be exams and quizzes given via Canvas throughout the semester. These will be on topics
covered in class during lectures, readings, and other assigned materials.
In-class presentations
Students will have assignments that will require them to present on a topic during class. The
presenting students will then be asked to help lead discussions on that topic. To prepare for this,
students will be assigned a research paper on their assigned topic.
Written Analysis
Students may be given written assignments to be submitted on Canvas. Using the discussion
sections on Canvas, students will have homework assignments where they are asked to reﬂect on
and analyze a paper, web article, or video.
Group Activities
Students will work in teams to create a VR project from start to finish. This includes the following:
Concept/Design
●
Background research and writing assignments
○
Design Document
Page3of9
Course S yllabus
■
Concept Art
■
Interaction Flow Charts
■
Core Mechanics
○
Literature Review
■
Existing Projects
■
Related studies
■
Subject Matter Research
Production
●
Build out prototype of team’s project
●
Add art and features
●
Develop finished “Vertical Slice” of the project
Evaluation
●
Develop user study plan
●
Create a video presentation and a research paper
Teams will be responsible for the timely submission of milestones and final deliverables.
There will be periods of the class where students are expected to work on their projects, even if nothing is explicitly
assigned for any given class day. Students are expected to show up to class with progress reports  during these
course dates.
Final Deliverables for the Group Project
●
1 Design Document
●
1 VR project, compiled to an executable
●
1 final documentation video
●
1 research  paper
VR Demo Times (outside of lectures)
Students are encouraged to schedule time outside of class to explore VR projects in the VIRL lab. If
students have their own VR setup, they are allowed to use that at home.
Grading Policy
To aid in understanding the method by which your project assignments are evaluated, read the
following carefully. The actual grading criteria will be related to these categories but will be more specific
in nature.
F: 59 and below:The student work is unresolved; theintentions are unclear and major criteria or goals
lack resolution. Presentation is incomplete and/or of poor quality. There is a complete lack of problem
solving, creative content and/or technical merit.
Page4of9
Course S yllabus
D: 60 -69:The solution has problems in two or moremajor areas; skill and design development is
marginal or incomplete. The project lacks imagination and/or design potential.
C: 70 -79:The student has solved the problem, butthe solution lacks depth of understanding; Some
program goals are not completely satisfied and the solution contains little promise even though most
issues have been addressed.
B: 80 -89:The student work shows imagination andpotential. Presentation and design content is good;
program requirements are fulfilled but in need of more refinement or development. There are no major
issues that would require a total redesign of the project.
A: 90- 100:The student work has imagination and thesolutions to the problems show understanding and
thought. The problem solution is highly developed and well presented; the entire assignment shows
depth and breadth and is well coordinated. The assignment’s potential has been achieved.
Peer Evaluation
The final group project will be turned in with peer evaluation forms. Students will give themselves and
each other scores on the following criteria:
1. Reliable for meetings
2. Contributes ideas to the group
3. Conducts Research
4. Gives input for work in progress
5. Individual Contribution
Late Work Policy
●
Late work will have 10 points deducted for every day that it is late.
Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is
exempted from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
Course Schedule
Class attendance is expected. Students should report any known future absences at least one week
prior to the absence. Any graded class activities missed (e.g., exams, presentations, homework
submissions) during unapproved absences cannot be made up without the instructor’s prior
approval and a valid excuse.
Page5of9
Course S yllabus
This below schedule is tentative and may change (notice will be given if changes are made):
Week
Tuesdays
Thursdays
1
Lecture:
Course Introduction/VR Overview
Class Activity:
Bio Presentations
2
Lecture:
History and Uses of VR
Lecture :
Virtual Environments and 3D Graphics
3
Lecture:
Immersion, Presence and Avatars
Online Discussion Lecture:
Education, Empathy, and Environment
4
Lecture:
Virtual Economies, Systems, and Core
Mechanics
Online DiscussionLecture:
Project Introduction(VR for Good)/Project
Structure;
DEMO
: GitHub
5
Lecture :
Navigation, Manipulation, and Control
Independent Exploration of VR Projects Lecture:
Design Documents
Reading Presentation (Grad)
Project related literature review due
6
Lecture :
Tracking, Controllers, and Motion
Capture DEMO:
TBD
Reading Presentation (Grad)
Design Document due (discuss with instructor)
7
Midterm review
Schedule project demos Midterm Exam
8
Lecture:
User Interface Design (UI/UX)
DEMO:
TBD
Reading Presentation (Grad)
9
Presenting and reporting
Preliminary project report
(introduction,
literature review, description, team roles,
progress, schedule)DEMO:
TBD
Reading Presentation (Grad)
10
Lecture:
Social and Collaborative VR
DEMO:
TBD
Reading Presentation (Grad)
11
Lecture:
VR Research approaches and evaluation/
IRB DEMO:
TBD
Reading Presentation (Grad)
12
Project user study plan due
Work Day
13
Individual team meetings
Work Day
14
Project presentations
Project presentations
15
Project presentations
Final project deliverables
Final Exam
May 6, 1pm-2pm
Page6of9
Course S yllabus
Technolog y Support
–Please contact Emma McLauchlan if you run into technical difficulties
University Policies
This section outlines the university level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU
Faculty Senate established the wording of these policies.
NOTE: Faculty members should not change the writtenstatements. A faculty member may add separate
paragraphs if additional information is needed.
Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer toStudent Rule 7in its entirety forinformation about excused absences, including
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed
appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer toStudent Rule 7in its entirety forinformation about makeup work, including definitions,
and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more
than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the
student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed
because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7,Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student
Conduct Code. (SeeStudent Rule 24.)
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work,
Page7of9
Course S yllabus
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case”
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
Texas A&M at College Station
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and
your rights and responsibilities ataggiehonor.tamu.edu.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a
disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below)
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or
chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with
Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
Texas A&M at College Station
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or visit
disability.tamu.edu.
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and
stalking.
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full
and part-time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and
must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an
incident that meets the following conditions (seeUniversity Rule 08.01.01.M1):
●
The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.
●
The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention –
including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most
instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be able to control how the report is
handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure
you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.
Page8of9
Course S yllabus
Texas A&M at College Station
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment
withCounseling and Psychological Services(CAPS).
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX
investigation and resolution process on the University’sTitle IX webpage.
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy
self-care by utilizing available resources and services on your campus
Texas A&M College Station
Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS) or call the
TAMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends.
24-hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800-273-8255)
or atsuicidepreventionlifeline.org.
Page9of9
