CSCE 221 S yllabus
Polsle y - Spring 2022
Course Information
Course Number:CSCE 221
Course Title:Data Structures and Algorithms
Section:513-516
Credit Hours:4
Space and Time:Lecture
All Sections:310 ZACHMWF12:40 PM - 1:30 PM
Labs
513:584 ZACHMW8:00 AM - 8:50 AM
514:584 ZACHMW9:10 AM - 10:00 AM
515:584 ZACHMW10:20 AM - 11:10 AM
516:584 ZACHMW11:30 AM - 12:20 PM
Instructor Details
Instructor:Seth Polsley
Office:EABC 112C
E-Mail:spolsley@tamu.edu
Office Hours:In Person:112 EABCMF2:00 PM - 3:30 PM
Online:calendly.com/spolsleyBy Appointment
Teaching Assistant:Pedro Figueiredo
Email:pedrofigueiredo@tamu.edu
Office Hours:Online:calendly.com/pedrofigueiredoBy Appointment
Course Description
From the CSCE Course Catalog:
Specification and implementation of basic abstract data types and their associated algorithms
including stacks, queues, lists, sorting and selection, searching, graphs, and hashing; performance
tradeoffs of different implementations and asymptotic analysis of running time and memory usage;
includes the execution of student programs written in C++.
Data Structures and Algorithms is one of the core CS classes because it covers fundamentals of storing
and processing data while introducing design and analysis of algorithms.  Many coding interviews,
programming tests, and future classes will depend on material from this class.
Course Prerequisites
Pre-requisit es:
CSCE 121 (Introduction to Program Design and Concepts) or
CSCE 113 (Intermediate Programming & Design)
Co-requisit es:
CSCE 222 / ECEN 222 (Discrete Structures for Computing) or
MATH 302 (Discrete Mathematics)
Course Learning Outcomes
This course details key concepts in Computer Science, aligning closely with the two tightly-integrated
fields in the title: “Data Structures” and “Algorithms.”  Accordingly, the content and expected outcomes
are structured along these paths.
By the end of this course, you should be able to:
-Describe basic abstract data types and
associated algorithms for lists, stacks,
queues, trees, graphs, hash tables, and
other similar structures.
-Apply Big-O asymptotic notation to
evaluate and select efficient algorithms
for a given problem with respect totime
and memory usage.
-Define and analyze algorithmic
complexity especially in regards to time
and memory efficiency
-Design and implement different data
structures according to resource
requirements in the C++ programming language.
Textbook and Resources
Textbook
Recommended textbook:
Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++by MarkWeiss, 4th Ed.
While this book is widely used in the field, there are many other C++ guides
and websites that you may find helpful to consult as well.
Canvas
Canvas will contain class materials, assignment descriptions, and grades.  You
can access the course on Canvas through your Howdy portal.
Piazz a
Piazza will be used for Q&A, announcements, and as a forum for other questions in the class.  Piazza is
preferred over email so that others can benefit from seeing the answers to your questions.  You can also
ask private questions to the instructor and TA.  You can self-enroll by visiting the link below and using the
specified access code if you wish; alternatively, you will be auto-enrolled by the end of the add/drop
period.
http://piazza.com/tamu/spring2022/csce221polsley(accesscode: 88266112)
CSCE 221 Syllabus
Page2of7
Mimir
Lab and programming assignments will be submitted through Mimir.  Mimir is an auto-grading system
which can give you more direct feedback while allowing the instructor and TA flexibility to review manual
portions of the assignments.  You can self-enroll by visiting the link below and using the specified access
code, or you may visit the direct enrollment link. Alternatively, you will be auto-enrolled by the end of
the add/drop period.
https://class.mimir.io/courses/72895125-fa9c-4b89-9bb7-a906c41c2e6a/(access code: 4c322d38c7)
Mimir Direct Enrollment
Gradesc ope
Some assignments, such as quizzes and exams, will be graded on Gradescope where there are better
options for submitting online and handling print exams than Canvas.  Your account will be automatically
created, which you can activate through the sidebar in Canvas under “Gradescope”.
https://www.gradescope.com/courses/353083
Grading
Scale
This class will use a standard A, B, C, etc. scale for final grades; depending on the distribution, a curve
may be applied.  The instructor reserves the right to raise grades near a borderline to the next highest
letter, based largely on the student’s perceived effort and participation.
ABCDF
90 - 100%80 - 89%70 - 79%60 - 69%< 60%
Componen ts
DescriptionPercentageCategory
Class Participation5%
25% Activities
Labs10%
Quizzes10%
Homeworks (4)10%
40% Assignments
Programming Assignments (5)30%
Exams (2)20%
35% Exams
Final Exam15%
The class is primarily structured according to a formative approach, using a collection of activities worth
comparatively few points that accumulate over the course of the semester.  In general, assume each
component is individual, although certain activities, such as labs, will be designed for groups.
CSCE 221 Syllabus
Page3of7
•Activities:
Class Participationconsists of in-class exercisesthat will be given as a means of quick assessment,
feedback, and practice, while serving as a measure of attendance.  Lecture attendance is highly
recommended, although not strictly required, but to provide flexibility, class participation is graded
out of 80%.  You can miss up to 20% of these exercises before the overall 5% will be affected,
enabling you to miss some lectures and to feel less concerned about individual activities.
Labswill be held on Mondays and Wednesdays beforelecture.  They will test concepts through
applied problems and be guided by the TA with the help of our grading platforms.  Unless specified,
lab attendance will be required to earn lab credit.
Quizzeswill typically be short and held in-classabout once a week.  Following the goal of formative
assessment, individual quizzes are a low stakes way to evaluate concept understanding.  The lowest
quiz grade will be dropped, and it is possible to overwrite most quizzes scores with exam scores.  For
instance, if the second exam score is higher than the average score for quizzes between Exam 1 and
2, those quiz scores will be replaced by the second exam score.
•Assignments:
Homeworksare take-home assignments that will notusually involve programming but will practice
concepts related to the programming assignments and the overall course.
Programming Assignmentscomprise the single largestportion of the course grade.  These will
require programming a solution to the given prompt and submitting your code and, if applicable,
discussion of the results.  Assignments will be graded on a number of factors: algorithm design, use
of data structures and user-defined types, quality of implementation, organization, correctness, and
other artifacts of submission such as a written report including results.  Readability is also critical, so
it is your responsibility to clearly comment your code.
•Exams:
Two regularExamsand oneFinal Examrepresent thesummative portion of the course.  Because this
is a foundational class for the field, exams will include conceptual and applied problems.
Policies
•Attendance:
The University views class attendance as the responsibility of an individual student.  Attendance is
important in this class as a means to keep current with the material, especially in labs, so students
are encouraged to attend.  Lab attendance will be evaluated based on your being present in the lab
and submitting the lab work.  Class attendance will be based on in-class activities and quizzes.
•Absences and Make-up Work:
University rules related to excused/unexcused absences and make-up work are located in Student
Rule 7:http://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07.  Ingeneral, you must notify the instructor at least a
day prior to missing class, or within 2 days after if not possible, and provide documentation of
excused absences within 3 days.  Make-up work for excused absences cannot be accepted more than
30 days after the deadline.  An unexcused absence on an exam will result in a zero.
You may notify the instructor using the form located attx.ag/221absence.
CSCE 221 Syllabus
Page4of7
•Late Submissions:
Typically, assignments are due at 11:59 PM on the day of the deadline.  If an assignment accepts late
work, submissions received after the deadline will be subject to a late penalty, which will be
computed based on the number of days late.  The penalty will be 15% every day, up to 4 days.  After
4 days, late work will receive no credit.
Additionally, you have a pool of 4 late days that you can use to extend an assignment an additional
24 hours without penalty.  While the assignments are organized so that you have plenty of time to
complete them, late days give you extra flexibility to handle unforeseen circumstances according to
your own judgement.
To use a late day from your pool, you must fill out the following form:tx.ag/221lateday.  Be sure to
specify the affected assignment.  You are responsible for tracking your own late days!  We will
maintain this information and will only allow up to 4 to be used.
•Accommodations:
The Division of Student Affairs has made a new portal available,Disability Accommodation Portal
(AIM), which you can use to request and send accommodationletters.  Please also visit
calendly.com/spolsleyto book an appointment withme.  I want to make the class as accessible as
possible, and I would like to talk with you to discuss the best plan for meeting your needs.
Course Schedule
WeekTopic(s)
1Introduction and Review
2Arrays, Vectors, Linked Lists, Stacks and Queues
3Searching and Sorting
4Algorithmic Analysis
5Trees
6Exam 1 - Friday, Feb. 25
7Heaps
8Special Trees
9Hashing
10Dictionaries and Maps
11Exam 2 - Friday, Apr. 8
12Graphs
13Shortest Path
14Spanning Trees
15Final Exam - Friday, May 6
CSCE 221 Syllabus
Page5of7
University Policies
Attendanc e Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer toStudent Rule 7in its entirety forinformation about excused absences, including
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Mak eup W ork P olicy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed
appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer toStudent Rule 7in its entirety forinformation about makeup work, including definitions,
and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more
than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the
student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed
because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7,Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student
Conduct Code. (SeeStudent Rule 24.)
Academic In tegrity St atemen t and P olicy
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work,
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case”
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and
your rights and responsibilities ataggiehonor.tamu.edu.
Americ ans with Disabilities Act (AD A) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a
disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below)
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or
chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with
Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
CSCE 221 Syllabus
Page6of7
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or visit
disability.tamu.edu.
Title IX and St atemen t on Limits t o Confiden tiality
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and
stalking.
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full
and part-time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and
must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an
incident that meets the following conditions (seeUniversity Rule 08.01.01.M1):
●
The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.
●
The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention –
including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most
instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be able to control how the report is
handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure
you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment
withCounseling and Psychological Services(CAPS).
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX
investigation and resolution process on the University’sTitle IX webpage.
Statemen t on Men tal Health and W ellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy
self-care by utilizing available resources and services on your campus
Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS) or call the
TAMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends.
24-hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline
(800-273-8255) or atsuicidepreventionlifeline.org.
CSCE 221 Syllabus
Page7of7
