9/15/22, 3:51 PM CPSC 445: Computers and New Media
https://people.engr .tamu.edu/shipman/courses/cnm/home-ug.html 1/3CPSC 445: Computers and New Media
   
Spring Semester , 2022
 Time and place: T/Th 9:35 - 10:50 am, HRBB 124
 Instructors: Dr. Frank Shipman  
 Office hours: PETE 335, TBA, or by appointment
Students
There may be students from technical and non-technical disciplines in this course. Projects and
assignments are designed such that each student can show of f their own skills. Programming and
software development is part of the group projects so it is recommended that students from outside of
computer science join project teams with students from computer science.
List of students in class
Course description
This class investigates three topics related to computational media:
(1) How do interactive media change the authoring and consumption of stories/narratives?
(2) What are the techniques and interfaces used to interact with content in a variety of media?
(3) How does networked access and authoring of media content change our views of ownership
and intellectual property?
These topics will be discussed at both a conceptual and tool level. By the end of the course, you will
be able to look at an existing system or design a new system with an understanding of the impact it
may have on communication and storytelling.
Prerequisites
Students should have a basic knowledge of computing and the humanities, and either the ability to
program complex systems or able to learn new software tools on their own. Ask instructor if you have
any questions.
Reading materials
Reading schedule
This course will focus around discussions of the readings. We will read two books and assorted
papers taken from a variety of conferences and journals concerning human-computer interaction,
hypertext, media studies, and computers and the humanities.
Books:
 Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace , by Janet Murray , book  
 The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind , by James Boyle, book
Selected papers:
The following links require access to the ACM Digital Library . Access to ACM Digital Library is
available from on-campus computers.9/15/22, 3:51 PM CPSC 445: Computers and New Media
https://people.engr .tamu.edu/shipman/courses/cnm/home-ug.html 2/3Grading
  
  Short assignments 10% 
  Class participation 10% 
  Team project  40% 
  Write-ups/quizzes     40%  
Grades will be on a 10 point scale: 90-100 = A, 80-89 = B, 70-79 = C, 60-69
= D, and <60 = F.
Short assignments
List of assignments.
There will be a number of assignments due in class. These assignments may require use of specific
software outside of class time and will take the form of short essays, written answers to questions, and
design documents. All material turned in should be printed using a computer printer or typed except
when noted otherwise.
Homework late policy:
 10% is deducted from your grade for every school day late up to a maximum of one week after the
original due date.
Class participation
Most class periods will include a discussion of reading materials. All students are expected to have
done the readings and be able to participate in discussions.
Project
Students will form three- to five-person teams and define a semester project or select one from a list of
existing ideas. There will be three preliminary progress reports for the projects emphasizing particular
phases of the interface design process:
 (1) identifying a topic, determining cognitive and social issues, and determining an approach,
(template for slides )
 (2) creating an initial system design and mock-up, ( template for slides ) and
 (3) instantiating the design in a prototype implementation (template for slides ).
The final project report (8-12 pages in the old ACM Conference Format ) will also require the design of
an evaluation procedure for refining the resulting interface. The in-class presentations of project
progress will be about 4 minutes long and the final presentation on the project will be approximately 15
minutes long and include all members of the team.
Project grades will be determined by both the instructor's review of the project and student's
description of their and other member's work.
Programming for projects:
 done in language and operating system of your choice on machines to which you have access.
General Note on Assignments9/15/22, 3:51 PM CPSC 445: Computers and New Media
https://people.engr .tamu.edu/shipman/courses/cnm/home-ug.html 3/3Important: All reports are to be printed on a word processor or typed (no handwritten assignments will
be accepted). All writing should be the work of the student -- any text taken from other sources needs
to be quoted and referenced. It is expected that students will correct grammar and spelling -- these are
grounds to deduct from your grade. (i.e. Use a spelling checker and reread what you write before
turning it in.)
Attendance Policy
All students are expected to attend and participate every class. Attendance policy will be administered
in accordance with T exas A&M University Student Rule 7.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy Statement
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is a federal anti-discrimination statute that provides
comprehensive civil rights protection for persons with disabilities. Among other things, this legislation
requires that all students with disabilities be guaranteed a learning environment that provides for
reasonable accommodation of their disabilities. If you believe you have a disability requiring an
accommodation, please contact Disability Services, currently located in the Disability Services building
at the Student Services at White Creek complex on west campus or call 979-845-1637. For additional
information, visit http://disability .tamu.edu.
Aggie Honor Code
"An Aggie does not lie, cheat, or steal or tolerate those who do."
Upon accepting admission to T exas A&M University , a student immediately assumes a commitment to
uphold the Honor Code, to accept responsibility for learning and to follow the philosophy and rules of
the Honor System. Students will be required to state their commitment on examinations, research
papers, and other academic work. Ignorance of the rules does not exclude any member of the T exas
A&M University community from the requirements or the processes of the Honor System. For
additional information please visit: www .tamu.edu/aggiehonor/
On all course work, assignments, and examinations at T exas A&M University , the following Honor
Pledge shall be preprinted and signed by the student:
"On my honor , as an Aggie, I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this academic
work."