CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 1 of 12 
 
CSCE 111 Introduction to Programming 
Concepts  Course Syllabus  
Wait a Minute  
What are all of these NON -computer science majors doing taking this class? I am about 
to reach over 1 500 students this semester in this class. Why are students taking this 
and why are other majors requiring it?  
The use of computers in every industry makes this a very good reason.  
Required for all Students?  
Throughout many college careers, there are classes that are required for every major. 
There are people that believe one or t wo computer science classes should be included 
in this list. Like English (in an English speaking location) is required to be able to 
communicate with people, more and more, we need to communicate with machines. 
Computer science classes can help with that.  
Why do I Teach This  
There are a lot of reasons this is a class I chose to teach:  
 I think it is fun to see a machine do exactly what I command.  
 I think it is more fun to see students realize this is very doable.  
 I enjoy the challenge and the reward of your success . 
 I have had a fantastic career developing software.  
 I think there is so much more to come, I want to help others get ready.  
 With such a large base of software now, one can focus on their specialty and not 
have to be a “Computer Scientist” to make good use of computing.  
 Java is a fun language to teach.  
What ’s Next ? 
Students completing this course should be able to:  
 Feel comfortable using a computer.  CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 2 of 12 
 Use Java to produce software.  
 Understand programming in other settings, like Excel  or JavaScript . 
 Feel comfortable changing their major to Computer Science.  
Course Overview  
The computer’s role in culture has expanded from a calculating machine used by 
governments to the iPod as a fashion accessory, the Smart Phone as a compani on, and 
the Internet as a medium of self -expression. In the 1950s, the idea of dedicating a 
computer to entertainment was unthinkable; today revenues from the computer game 
industry exceed Hollywood. More humans own a computer than own a toothbrush and 
Apple is one of the world’s largest company having overtaken many Oil, Agriculture, and 
Manufacturing  sectors . 
We inhabit a century where every job will be technical. In the 21st century, learning to 
program a computer is empowerment. From “if” conditionals t o “for” loops, knowing the 
basics of programming allows you to understand the way the modern world works. 
Programming instruction teaches procedural and functional thinking, project 
management and time management, skills that are essential components of an  
empowered individual. Programming is the power to create, the power to change, and 
the power to influence. Today’s students regardless of their ultimate field of study or 
occupation need this fundamental knowledge.  
Programming teaches logic, algorithmic t hinking, and an iterative approach to solving 
problems and testing your ideas. These skills make you smarter and are useful no 
matter what you do. Learning to program can be incredibly rewarding, give you a new 
appreciation for technology, and introduce co untless career opportunities.  
Catalog Description  
Using computation to enhance problem -solving abilities; understanding how people 
communicate with computers, and how computing affects society; computational 
thinking; software design principles, including algorithm design, data representation, 
abstraction, modularity, structured and object -oriented programming, documentation, 
testing, portability, and maintenance; understanding programs’ abilities and limitations; 
development and execution of programs.  
Week ly Topics  
Some of the topics to be covered in lecture periods are:  
 Formal and natural languages.  CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 3 of 12 
 Variables, assignment, printing, mental models for computers.  
 Operators, math, random numbers, algorithms.  
 Conditionals, if statements. Switch statements, tree s, composing conditionals.  
 Looping, while do loops, do while loops, flow charts.  
 Arrays and Lists , enhanced for loops  
 Combining branching looping and I/O  
 Methods  and Classes  
 Code refactoring, Java Libraries, Objects, Exceptions, Code verification  
 File I/O  
 Object Creation and Design  
 Graphical user interface  
Learning Outcomes  
Students completing this course should be able to:  
 Use a text editor to program Java code.  
 Use a Java compiler to produce executable software.  
 Identify the basic syntax and semantics of the Java programming language.  
 Use appropriate commenting, layout, and naming to communicate code intent  
 Understand the primitive data types built into the Java language.  
 Understand the concepts of Java classes and objects.  
 Understand the concepts of lifet ime, scope, and the initialization mechanism of 
variables.  
 Implement Java code branching using if or switch statements.  
 Program loops with while, for, and do statements.  
 Make use of arrays to store and process lists of data.  
 Assemble data and methods into  classes following the software engineering 
principles of encapsulation and data hiding.  
 Organize Java code following the software engineering principles of modularity 
and abstraction.  
 Create Java I/O interfaces  
 Read, interpret, analyze, and explain introd uctory Java programs.  
 Test and evaluate introductory Java programs.  
Class Meetings:  
This course re quires you to have a computer.   This complies with the College of Engineering’s Bring 
Your Own Device (BYOD) policy .   
Lecture:  
 Sections 500 – 501: Innovati ve Learning Classroom Building  112 
o  MWF 11:30 AM – 12:20 PM CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 4 of 12 
Lab: 
 Section 501: Innovati ve Learning Classroom Building   223 
o Mondays and Wednesdays 3:00 pm - 3:50 pm  
 Section 502: Innovati ve Learning Classroom Building   223 
o Mondays and Wednesdays 4:10 pm - 5:00 pm  
 
Instructor:  
Robert Lightfoot  
Use Canvas email for question about class and grades.  
 
Help/Office Hours:   Days/Times Posted on Canvas  
Teaching Assistants:  
CSCE 111 has 7 undergraduate TAs this semester. You will find their office hours in 
Canvas.  
Grading  
Grading will come from the accumulation of points throughout the semester. There  are a 
total of 1500 point s available to earn. You need 105 0 or more to get an A. Unlike the 
traditional 90%  or 1350 points , you can choose from different assignments with different 
values to get your points.  You can choose the point level you want to achieve and know 
the grade you have earned base on the items you have shown mastery towards.  
To show mastery in a topic, you must achieve 70% or greater. Otherwise no credit is 
given for that topic.  
The grading s cale expected to be used is:  
A >= 1050 points  > B >= 950 points  > C >= 850 points  D >= 750 points > F < 750 points  
The main path includes 4 categories . A student  must get 70% on each of the main  
assignment groups to get a C or better in the class.  
Main  Categories  
4 of the 11 pathways make up the main  Categories that need to be mastered to 
be successful in this class.  To pass the class you must pass the core 
categories . To get a C or better in the class, you must get 70% or better in the 
core categories.   CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 5 of 12 
The main  requirements will provide enough points to get a C  in the course.  This 
is the minimum needed to pass.  By choosing other assignments  or additional 
pathways , you can build your grade to the grade you want.   
zyBooks : (Core)  
Weekly zyBooks assignmen ts account for 100 points . Each week will have a 
reading to do before class and examples and challenge activities to do by the 
end of the week. You must archive 70 points for this to count towards your point 
total.  
Lab:  (Core)  
Lab works, activities, and/or demos count for 100 points of your grade.  You must 
archive 70 points for this to count towards your point total.  
Assignments:  (Core)  
Weekly coding assignments account for 500 points  of your grade. More 
complicated assignments towards the end of the semester are weighted heavier 
than earlier ones.  You must archive 350 points for this to count towards your 
point total.  
 
Projects:  (Core)  
Projects account for 200 points  of your grade. There will be two projects with 
each project having multiple deliverables. Projects are team -based.  You must 
archive 140 points for this to count towards your point total.  You must be pr esent 
for milestone checks and project demonstrations to receive  credit for your 
project.  
 
Additional pathways  to build your personal learning experience:  
7 of the 11 categories are additional pathways  that you can pick. If you show 
mastery in this topic (score 70 or more) these points can go to your total.  Many of 
these are a great way to build a solid base of points that will get you the grade 
you want.  
Engagement  and Participation:  
Engagement  counts for 100 points . Historically in my classes, those students 
who get full credit for engagement  make the highest grades. Those who get less 
than full credit, down to zero credit, do not make the highest grades.  
Each week you will have several opportunities to show your engagement . This is 
one of the best ways to earn points. Most engagement points will be earned 
while in class.  There will be more than 100 points of opportunity to account for CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 6 of 12 
some missed chances. This path follows along each week of the semester.  
There is no way to make up engagement.   
Discussions  
Weekly discussions account for 100 points . Topics will be given every week. You 
will provide your thoughts on the discussion and reflect on 2 other students work. 
You must archive 70 points for this to count towards your point total.  These are 
online discussions in Canvas  that happen once p er week for the whole semester.  
Coding Challenges   
Coding challenges will be worth 100 points. There will be coding challenges 
available for you to be able to do. Information will be posted when the challenge 
is available.  You must archive 70 points  (combi ned score on all 5 ) for this to 
count towards your point total.  Coding Challenges is a 5 week “scenic tour” of 
things we have learned.  
Social Media Scavenger Hunt   
A scavenger hunt will be worth 50 points. Information will be posted when the 
challenge is available. You must archive 35 points for this to count towards your 
point total.  The scavenger hunt is a small rest stop on your path  that will be 
available early in the semester.  
JavaScript  
A JavaScript option worth 50 points will be added to one of you r assignments. 
Details will be provided. If you would like to try this, it can add to your points. You 
must archive 35 points for this to count towards your point total.  This is another 
small rest stop on your path that will be available once you have lear ned enough 
in the class to be successful.  
YouTube Channel  
A YouTube Channel option worth 100 points will be available as one of your 
assignments. Details will be provided. If you would like to try this, it can add to 
your points. You must archive 70 point s for this to count towards your point total.  
The YouTube option is another scenic side road that will help you show your 
mastery in this class.  
Final Test (Optional)  
A Final test will be worth 100 points. If you usually do well at test s, this will be a 
chance to take one. Information will be posted when the test is available, how CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 7 of 12 
you will take it, and what it will cover. You must archive 70 points for this to count 
towards your point total.  This is a great way to make up for some things that 
might not have  gone as planned.  It only adds to your grade and cannot reduce it.  
Late Work:  
Late work on coding assignments will receive a 10% reduction per day for a maximum 
of 3 days. After this period, late work is not accepted.  Late work is not accepted for 
other i tems.  
Extensions  on due dates are required for any excused absences. You may ask for 
these in class.  
Required Textbook  
zyBooks Java Textbook is required for this class. To subscribe:  
1. Click any zyBooks assignment link in your learning management system  
(Do not go to the zyBooks website and create a new account)  
2. Subscribe   
 
A subscription is  $77. Students may begin subscribing on  Dec 27, 202 1 and the cutoff 
to subscribe is  May 10, 202 2. Subscriptions will last  until Jun 13, 202 2. 
 
 
University and Course Policies  
Attendance Policy:  
The univer sity views class attendance and participation as an individual student 
responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all 
assignments.   Please refer to  Student Rule 7  in its enti rety for information about 
excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
Attendance  and participation  is expected in the course and will be recorded in both 
lectures and labs.   Up to 100 points  of the course grade will be based on participation , 
and absences may prevent you from earning any partici pation  points .   
It is particularly important to attend lab sessions since this will often serve as a team 
meeting time for your project work.   In addition, students may miss in -class activities, 
which  will not be made up without prior approval.   Note that remote students are still 
required to attend class online sessions and participate in in -class activities.  
Makeup Work Policy:   CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 8 of 12 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when 
attendance contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in  Student Rule 7 , or 
other reasons deemed appropriate by the instructor.   Please refer to  Student Rule 7  in 
its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related 
documentation and timelines.  
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a 
period of more than  30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work 
should be agreed upon by the student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an o pportunity for the student to make 
up work missed because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor 
Code an d Student Conduct Code. (See  Student Rule 24 .) 
If you know you are going to miss a class or assessment, please let the instructor know 
ahead of time.   If an absence is excused (see  Student Rule 7 ), the instructor will either 
provide you an opportunity to make up any work that contributes to the final grade or 
provide a satisfactory alternative by a date agreed upon by you and instructor.   You are 
respo nsible for providing satisfactory evidence to the instructor to substantiate the 
reason for the absence.   Falsification of documentation is a violation of the Honor 
Code.   Other absences may be excused at the discretion of the instructor with prior 
notific ation and proper documentation.   In cases where prior notification is not feasible 
(e.g., accident or emergency) you must provide notification by the end of the second 
working day after the absence, including an explanation of why notice could not be sent 
prior to the class.   Accommodations sought for absences due to the observance of a 
religious holiday can be sought either prior or after the absence, but not later than two 
working days after the absence.  
Bring Your Own Device:  
BYOD is an  initiative in the  college of engineering where students are required to bring 
their own computing device to class.   Students need to have a computer or laptop with 
stable internet access, microphone, and webcam.   Students also need a smartphone as 
a backup in the case of a  network outage.   See the  BYOD webpage  for information on 
the program, approved devices, and financial assistance.   BYOD devices fulfill the 
requirements for this class.  
Communication:  
We will use  Canvas  to post assignments, course resources, and send 
announcements.   It is your responsibility to check Canvas and pay attention to class 
emails.  CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 9 of 12 
Other forms of Communication will be outlined in Canvas.  
For personal or private questions, email me through canvas .  I receive a lot of email  in 
the regular TAMU email , this will help me find you and answer your question much 
quicker.  
Submissions of Assignments:   
All assignments will be turned in electronicall y through  Canvas  (unless otherwise 
specified) by the due date and time given on the assignment.   Email submissions will 
not be accepted.  
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy:  
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
For this class, any use of websites like Chegg, CourseHero, or others is neither needed 
nor allowed. All instances of this will be sent to the Honor Council with the 
recommended sanction of F*. No assignment is worth this.  In fact, many assignments 
can be skipped altogether without preventing an A in the course. The posting of 
assignments from this course, as well as accessing the answers provided is considered 
cheating. Logs are provided from these companies and any access  to a question can 
result in an Honor Council Violation.  (See the Course Resource tab on Canvas for 
approved resources.)  
 “Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to 
an instructor. If asked, students must be able  to produce proof that the item submitted is 
indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. 
The inability to authenticate one’s work, should the instructor request it, may be 
sufficient grounds to initiate an academic  misconduct case” ( Section 20.1.2.3, Student 
Rule 20 ). 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, 
academic integrity, and your right s and responsibilities at  aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 Definitions of academic misconduct  which includes plagiarism.  
 List of sanctions  that can be applied if academic misconduct is found.  
For this class, certain aspects of the honor code need to be clarified.  
1. There will be times in this course whe re you or your team make use of external 
code/software/libraries. Whenever this is done, you must make sure that you:  
A. Follow any licensing and/or use restrictions that library/code requires  
B. Clearly document what the source of the external code was, and how  it was 
used  CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 10 of 12 
2. There may be cases in this course where you or your team seek outside 
assistance related to one of the projects. Any assistance received from people 
other than members of your team, the professor, teaching assistants, or peer 
teacher needs to be clearly documented.  
3. You will be working in team environments in this course, and your work as a team 
will be used to determine grades. As such, it is your responsibility, when asked, to:  
a. Accurately describe the work that you have done on a team project.  
Claiming credit for work that you have not done or that others did instead is 
a violation of the honor code.  
b. Accurately describe (to the best of your knowledge) the performance of other 
team members. “Covering” for another team member (claiming they did 
more work than you know they did, or exaggerating the work they did) or 
“spiking” them (claiming they did less work than you know they did or 
purposefully minimizing the work they did) are examples of honor code 
violations.  
c. Prevent (as best you can) or repo rt (known or suspected) violations of the 
honor code by your other team members. You share responsibility when a 
project is turned in; if you are aware of a teammate having violated the code 
in his/her work on the project, and do not report it, you are cla iming credit for 
that violation yourself.  
If there are any questions or concerns about whether an action is appropriate, you 
should check with the professor or teaching assistant first. If in doubt, assume that it is 
not appropriate.  
 
Americans with Disabi lities Act (ADA) Policy Statement:  
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning 
opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a 
disability or think you may have a disability, please conta ct Disability Resources in the 
Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or visit  disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities 
may include but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, 
or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability -
related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality:  
Texas A&M University is  committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and 
productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based 
discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, 
domestic violence,  dating violence, and stalking.  
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university 
employees (including full and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 11 of 12 
workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and must report to the Title IX Office if the 
employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an incident that meets the 
following conditions (see  University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 The incident is reasonably  believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
 The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the 
time of the incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an 
employee of the University.  
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their 
attention – including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class 
assignment or paper, class discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most instances, you will be able to control 
how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The 
University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you 
and to ens ure access to the resources you need.  
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make 
an appointment with  Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).  
Students can learn more abo ut filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and 
navigating the Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’s  Title IX 
webpage . 
 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness:  
Texas A&M Univer sity recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors 
that influence a student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are 
encouraged to engage in proper self -care by utilizing the resources and services 
available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). Students who need 
someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 
a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available 
through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or 
at suicidepreventionlifeline.org . 
 
Campus Safety Measures:  
To promote public safety and protect students, faculty, and staff during the coronavirus 
pandemic, Texas A&M University has adopted policies and practices for the Fall 2020 
academic term to limit virus transmission. Students must observe the following prac tices 
while participating in face -to-face courses and course -related activities (office hours, 
help sessions, transitioning to and between classes, study spaces, academic services, 
etc.):  CSCE 111: Introduction to Computer Science , Spring  2022 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Texas A&M University
 
 
 
 
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot                  Page 12 of 12 
 Self-monitoring:   Students should follow CDC recommendations for sel f-
monitoring.  Students who have a fever or exhibit symptoms of COVID -19 
should participate in class remotely and should not participate in face -to-
face instruction.  
 Face Coverings:  Face co verings  (cloth face covering, surgical mask, etc.) are 
encouraged to  be properly worn in all non -private spaces including classrooms, 
teaching laboratories, common spaces such as lobbies and hallways, public study 
spaces, libraries, academic resource, and support offic es, and outdoor spaces 
where 6 feet of physical distancing is difficult to reliably maintain. Description of 
face coverings and additional guidance are provided in the  Face Covering 
policy  and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)  available on the  Provost website . 
  
Personal Illness and Quarantine:  
Student s required to quarantine must participate in courses and course -related activities 
remotely and  must not attend face -to-face course activities . Students should notify 
their instructors of the quarantine requirement. Students under quarantine are expected 
to participate in courses and complete graded work unless they have symptoms that are 
too severe to participate in course activities.  
Students experiencing personal injury or illness that is too severe for the student to 
attend class qualify for an excused absence (See  Student Rule 7, Section 7.2.2 .) To 
receive an excused absence, students must comply with the documentation and 
notification guidelines outlined in Student Rule 7. While Student Rule 7, Section 7.3.2.1, 
indicates a medical confirmation note from the student’s medical provider is preferred . 
 
Schedule  
In this class, our weekly schedule will be very constant. The week will contain a module 
that has zyBooks reading and some challenge activities. A discussion over current 
topics. And a coding assignment.  
Each week in Lab you are likely to get 2 lab works to complete.  We will introduce 
additional projects throughout the semester to  
After module 6, we will start our first project.  
After m odule 10, we will start our final project.  
© 2016 –2022  Robert Lightfoot    
 