  Course	Syllabus	  
  Page 1 of 4 
Course	Information	 Course Number: CSCE 222 Course Title: Discrete Structures for Computing Section: 503 Time: MWF 11:30-12:20 Location: ZACH 350 Credit Hours: 3  Instructor	Details	 Instructor: Sing-Hoi Sze Office: PETR 427 Phone: 845-5009 E-Mail: shsze@cs.tamu.edu Office Hours: MWF 10-11 PETR 427 or on zoom  Course	Description	 Provide mathematical foundations from discrete mathematics for analyzing computer algorithms, for both correctness and performance; introduction to models of computation, including finite state machines and Turing machines.  Course	Prerequisites	 MATH 151  Course	Learning	Outcomes	 The course will allow students to understand the relationships between logic, proofs and sets, and apply results from discrete mathematics to analysis of algorithms. Students will be able to produce proofs and apply counting techniques. They will have a basic understanding of models of computation.  Textbook	 Rosen K.H.  Discrete Mathematics and its Applications.  McGraw-Hill.  Grading	Policy	 1. Homework assignments (30%): written assignments handed out every one or two weeks. 2. Two midterms (20% each). 3. Final exam (30%).  Letter grades will be assigned as follows:    Course	Syllabus	  
  Page 2 of 4 
     90-100          80-89                70-79                 60-69                <60           A           B or better       C or better       D or better       F or better  Late	Work	Policy	 Submission of late assignments and scheduling of make-up exams should be arranged before the due date.  Course	Schedule	 Week Topic 1 Logic and proofs 2 Sets 3 Functions 4 Sequences and sums 5 Algorithms and complexity 6 Induction and recursion 7 Counting 8 Permutations and combinations 9 Generalized permutations and combinations 10 Recurrence relations 11 Generating functions 12 Inclusion-exclusion 13 Relations 14 Models of computation  University	Policies	 Attendance	Policy	 The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.   Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  Makeup	Work	Policy	 Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.   Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.    Course	Syllabus	  
  Page 3 of 4 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).  “The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence” (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).  Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)  Academic	Integrity	Statement	and	Policy	 “An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  “Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).  You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.  Americans	with	Disabilities	Act	(ADA)	Policy	 Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or visit disability.tamu.edu. Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  Title	IX	and	Statement	on	Limits	to	Confidentiality	 Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking.  With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full and part-time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1):  • The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.    Course	Syllabus	  
  Page 4 of 4 
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment with Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS).   Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage.  Statement	on	Mental	Health	and	Wellness	 Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self-care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800-273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org. 