CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 1/9  
Syllabus  
 
Course Information  
 
Course Number:   CSCE 482 , Spring 202 2 
Course Title:  Senior Capstone Design  
Section:  931 
Time:  Monday  and Wednesday  
 11:35 AM to 11:55 AM Lecture  
 12:00 to 2:30  PM Lab  
Location:  EABA 118  
Credit Hours:  3 
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:  Rabi Mahapatra  
Office:  217 PETR  
Phone:  979-845-5787  
E-Mail:  rabi at tamu.edu  
Website: https://codes.engr.tamu.edu/rabi/   
Office Hours:  Monday  and Wednes day by appointment only  
 
TA: Krishna C Kushal  
E-Mail:  krishnakushal at tamu.edu  
Office hours:  By appointment  
 
Course Description  
 
Engineering design; working as a design -team member, conceptual design methodology, design 
evaluations, total project planning and management techniques, design optimization, systems 
manufacturing costs considerations; emphasis placed upon student's activities as design professionals.   
 
CSCE 482(the capstone design program) consists of the design and implementation of a system 
(capstone design project) based on the knowledge and skills  acquired in earlier course work with 
significant computer software.  
 
CSCE 482 is a project -oriented course aimed at developing system integration skills. Students work in 
groups of 4 -5 people to complete a significant engineering design project. Every pro ject requires 
complete implementation, documentation and demonstration of a software system, which may also 
involve minor hardware too.   The focus is not only on the final product but also on design methodology, 
management process and teamwork.   
 
Each team  is required to manage its own efforts to complete its project in a timely manner. Group 
members are required to keep individual lab notebooks recording their efforts and their personal 
impressions of the project. Students are graded based on both the qual ity of the group product and 
their individual contributions.    
 
Every team is required to schedule a weekly meeting with the course instructor and the TAs, preferably CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 2/9 during the official class or lab hours. These meetings must be attended by every group member. Since 
the projects will be student managed, the exact nature and style of these meetings is at the group’s 
discretion. However, every member of the group is expe cted to participate.   
 
At the end of the semester, each group will make a public presentation describing and demonstrating 
their work.   These presentations are open to the university community.  
Course Prerequisites  
 
Senior classification; CSCE 315, CSCE 41 1, and two additional CSCE tracked courses.   
 
Special Course Designation  
 
Fulfills a writing/communication requirement for graduation. As a result , the aggregate score of the 
written reports must be a passing grade in order to get a grade in the course.  
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
 
It is expected that successful participation in the course will allow the student to demonstrate:   
• an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering (3.a)   
• an ability to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data (3.b)   
• an ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs (3.c)   
• an ability to function on multi -disciplinary teams (3.d)   
• an ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineerin g problems (3.e)   
• an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility (3.f)   
• an ability to communicate effectively (3.g)   
• an ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering 
practice (3.k)   
 
Moreover, co urse -specific outcomes are  
1. understand and utilize the engineering design method to generate potential solutions to a 
specific design challenge;  
2. understand the basic of project management including: statements of work, work break -down 
structures, critical p ath identification, distribution of tasks, project tracking and status reporting; 
be able to generate status reports;  
3. understand professional communication methods and techniques including formal reports and 
presentations;  
4. clearly communicate ideas, status  and test results through written reports;  
5. clearly communicate through oral presentations.  
6. to rigorously define design requirements for potential solutions.  
7. Understand  and incorporate engineering standards and multiple realistic constraints that 
include mo st of the following considerations: economic, environmental, sustainability, 
manufacturability, ethical, health and safety, social and political.  
Textbook and/or Resource Materials  
 
Required:  
Patric  M. Lencioni, 2002, “The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: a Leadership Fable” Jossey -Bass. 
(Electronic copy available to all via the library.)  
 CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 3/9 Recommended:  
Ralph Ford and Chris Coulston, 2007, "Design for Electrical and Computer Engineers,” McGraw -
Hill Educat ion. 
 
Barry Hyman, 2003, "Fundamentals of Engineering Design," second edition, Prentice Hall.  
 
Roger Pressman, 2009, “Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach,” seventh edition, 
McGraw -Hill.  
 
James Shore, 2007, “The Art of Agile Development,” O'Rei lly (Electronic copy available to all via 
the library.)  
 
Supplemental:  
Technical material from the literature, manufacturer’s data sheets and user manuals.   
 
Grading Policy  
 
The final grade you will receive in the class will be based on points accumulated during the 
semester.   Thus, both continued progress (the process) and the quality of your product (and other 
deliverables) will determine your grade.   Although the bulk of your grade is based on the performance of 
your team, individual performance will als o be gauged.  
1. Project Proposal (10%) :  These points will be based on the originality, quality and feasibility of 
the proposed work, the analysis of alternative solutions, the consideration of economic and 
societal aspects, and the project management approach, as reflected on your written proposal 
(75%) and oral presentation (25%). A template for the proposal report and a presentation rubric 
are available on the course webpage.  
2. Weekly Progress (10%) :  This grade will be based on your team’s ability to maintain the project 
on schedule.   Each team submits a weekly report, which should be incremental and should 
specifically address the following:  
1. Agenda for the weekly meeting with the instructor and the TA  
2. Team’s accomplishments during this period.   Accomplishments need to be measurable, 
e.g. “did more research on such and such” is not an accomplishment, it is an activity 
(and a loosely defined one).  
3. Team’s goals for the following week (individual tasks are entered on basecamp)  
4. Minutes from t he previous meeting  
Weekly progress reports are due at 8AM on the day of the weekly meeting.   Reports are limited 
to one page and should be submitted according to the template provided in the course 
website.   The team leader will be responsible for submit ting these reports and leading the 
discussion during the weekly meeting. One of the team members, acting as a scribe, will be 
responsible for generating the meeting minutes throughout the semester.  
3. Critical Design Review (10%) : The CDR is a mid -semester ev aluation of your project. The CDR 
grade will be based on the quality of your design (75%) –as reflected on your oral/poster presentation 
and written report, and on the degree to which you have a complete design (25%).   A template for the 
CDR report and a p resentation rubric are available on the course webpage.   
4. Final Communication (10%) : This grade will be based on the quality of the final presentation 
(25%), as well as the contents and professional finish of the documentation (75%).   Final reports should 
have a discussion of constraints that the team had to satisfy (e.g., cost, time, technology limitations) and CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 4/9 of relevant industry standards used (e.g., coding, interfaces, safety). A template for the final report and a 
presentation rubric are available on t he course webpage.   
5. Project Grade (20%) :  A final grade will be assigned to your project based on the completion of 
all the objectives stated in the proposal, as well as on a live demonstration in front of the class.   The 
complexity of your project and the  size of your team will be factored in.  
Due date: Project demonstrations will take place the last day of class of the week prior to final 
presentations.   This earlier deadline ensures that teams have time to (i) thoroughly test and 
validate their systems a fter the demo, and (ii) prepare the final presentation.  
6. Team work (10%) : It is very important to understand that accomplishing the technical objectives 
of the project is not sufficient.   These accomplishments should not come at the expense of destroying 
relationships among team members.   Thus, a grade will be assigned based on the ability of the group to 
function as a team.   Is there evidence that the group engaged in team building activities? Were 
contributions to the project evenly distributed? Were membe rs equally engaged in discussions during 
meetings?   Was there an effective division of responsibilities?   
 
Note: the work should be done primarily in the lab and as a group, regardless of whether you 
can perform your task assignments individually elsewhere .  Being physically present in the same 
room encourages collaboration and equal distribution of workload.   A regular work schedule 
should be included in the proposal, showing the times when the team will meet in the lab to 
work on the project (in addition to meeting times).  
 
7. Individual Performance (30%) :  Points in this category are awarded based on assessments of 
your personal contribution to the team efforts:  
a. Notebook (10%): You are required to maintain an individual design notebook to collect any 
information relevant for the project, including ideas, references, designs, and discussions. Your 
notebook will be graded based on:   
1. the evidence of engineering design (e.g., sketches, block diagrams, schematics, 
pseudo -code, experimental results, formal d erivations),   
2. the regularity of your entries during the semester, and   
3. the organization of your notebook  
b. Participation (10%): The instructor and TAs will evaluate your attendance to meetings, 
participation in the discussions, and contributions to the team.   Each student is also required to pass a 
teamwork quiz with a score of 75 or higher (see tentative schedule); failure to do so will result in a 5% 
penalty on the final grade.  
c. Peer Review (10%): Your performance will be evaluated by each of your team membe rs 
throughout the semester.   Peer reviews should be submitted to the TA no later than 8AM of the due 
date. Late submissions will NOT be accepted.   
 
NOTE: Grades will not be assigned until all project deliverables have been turned in (see below), all 
borrow ed items (e.g., keys, books, equipment) have been returned to their proper location or their 
owner, and the workstations in the lab have been thoroughly cleaned up.   All team members are 
required to be present at the time of the final delivery.   
 
Final del iverables  
• USB Drive including the following (please organize into folders, e.g., Docs, Source, Hardware, 
Media, References, Freeware, etc.)  
o It should include a plain text readme file that documents the list of contents.   
o Designs: code, schematics, data, da ta sheets, freeware software tools, etc.  CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 5/9 o Reports: proposal, CDR, weekly reports, final report, and ALL presentations  
o Audiovisual media: close -up pictures of your system and a high -quality movie demo of 
the system working, for posterity (see gallery in the course webpage for movie samples)  
o Individual notebooks (in digital form)  
• Final prototype, as well as any spare parts and supplies  
• Software install, to be demonstrated on several machines  
• Peer reviews  
• Evidence of individual design contributions   
 
Final reports should have a discussion of constraints that the team had to satisfy (e.g., cost, time, 
technology limitations) and of relevant industry standards used (e.g., coding, interfaces, safety).  
 
Document preparation  
 
All major documents (proposal, CDR, and final documentation) should contain a title page, an outline, as 
well as clear section and subsection headings, etc.   Please use the templates available in the course 
website. Please run a spell check before submitting.   
 
Cour se Schedule  
 
Week  Date  Classroom Meeting  Materials Due  
1 1/19  Kickoff Lecture  Introduction  
1/24 Kickoff Lecture  Resumes  
2 1/26 Kickoff Lecture  Teams are formed  
2/02 Kickoff Lecture   
3 2/07 Kickoff Lecture  Teamwork quiz  
2/09 Kickoff Lectur e  
4 2/14   
2/16 Proposal Presentations   
5 2/21 Proposal Presentations  Proposal report, peer review 1  
2/23   
6 2/28   
3/02   
7 3/07   
3/09   CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 6/9 8 3/14 Spring break   
3/16   
9 3/21 CDR Presentations   
3/23 CDR Presentation  CDR report, Peer Review 2  
10 3/28   
3/30   
11 4/04   
4/06   
12 4/11   
4/13   
13 4/18   
4/20  Peer review 3  
14 4/25 Project Demos    
4/27 Project Demos    
15 5/02 
5/04 Final Presentations   Final report, and all deliverables  
 
Optional Course Information Items  
 
Learning Resources  – The Writing Center is open and available to assist students this semester . They 
can provide assistance on the written reports that are due throughout the class (proposal, CDR, final 
report). More information can be found at https://writingcenter.tamu.edu/  
 
University Policies  
 
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.   
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Not attending weekly meetings harms the other members of your group and makes it much more 
difficult for the instructor to assess your contributions to the group effort.   Therefore, attendance, 
punctuality and active participation in the weekly meetings ar e required. Failure to attend a meeting or 
late arrivals (more than 10 minutes late) will be reflected in your individual grade.   Emergencies, CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 7/9 however, do happen. Lateness or absence can be excused if there is a valid reason. Illness, death in the 
family, inclement weather or accidents for commuters, etc., are valid reasons. Oversleeping, a term 
paper due, an exam to cram for, etc., are not valid reasons.   Ultimately, the instructor reserves the right 
to determine what constitutes a “valid reason” on a case -by-case basis.   If you know you are going to be 
late or miss a class, please let the instructor and your teammates know, so that they may plan for your 
absence and make the best use of their time.   
 
Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attend ing class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropriate by the instructor.   
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for ma ke-up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for  the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
 
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about th e Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed  to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979)  845-1637 or 
visit disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to disc uss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 8/9 Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual 
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and men tal health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes a ware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.   
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to t heir attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class 
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, you will be able to cont rol how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a 
formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options 
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to disc uss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).   
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navi gating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self -
care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). 
Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the 
National Sui cide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 
COVID -19 Temporary Amendment to Minimum Syllabus Requirements  
 
The Faculty Senate temporarily added the following statement s to the minimum syllabus requirements 
in Spring 202 2 as part of the university’s COVID -19 response.   
“To help protect Aggieland and stop the spread of COVID -19, Texas A&M University urges students to be 
vaccinated and to wear masks in classrooms and all o ther academic facilities on campus, including labs. 
Doing so exemplifies the Aggie Core Values of respect, leadership, integrity, and selfless service by 
putting community concerns above individual preferences. COVID -19 vaccines and masking — 
regardless of  vaccination status — have been shown to be safe and effective at reducing spread to 
others, infection, hospitalization, and death.”   CSCE 48 2 Syllabus  
 9/9 PLEASE NOTE that general communications regarding COVID -19 policies, and how these will impact 
spring semester teaching, will be regularly updated on the following 
website : www.tamu.edu/coronavirus/index.html . Any information specific to COVID -19 response and 
management in classrooms wil l be shared in additional email communication.  
 
Personal Illness and Quarantine  
 
Students required to quarantine must participate in courses and course -related activities remotely and 
must not attend face -to-face course activities . Students should notify their instructors of the 
quarantine requirement. Students under quarantine are expected to participate in courses and 
complete graded work unless they have symptoms that are too severe to participate in course activities.  
 
Students experiencing pers onal injury or Illness that is too severe for the student to attend class qualify 
for an excused absence (See Student Rule 7, Section 7.2.2 .) To receive an excused absence, students 
must comply with th e documentation and notification guidelines outlined in Student Rule 7.  
 
Operational Details for Spring  202 2 Courses  
 
For additional information, please review the FAQ  on Spring  2022 courses at Texas A&M University.  
 
 