  Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 8 
Course Information  
 
Course Number:  CSCE 451 
Course Title:  Software Reverse Engineering  (REEN)  
Section:  TBD 
Time:  TBD 
Location:  HRBB 113  
Credit Hours:  3 
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:  Jyh-Charn Liu  
Office:  PETR 435  
Phone:  979-845-8739  
E-Mail:  liu@cse.tamu.edu  
Office Hours:  By appointment, on -line 
TEACHING  ASSISTANT  
Office:    EABA 108B  
Email:    hdwang@tamu.edu  
Office hour    By appointment, on -line 
 
Course Description  
This course aims to introduce the art of inferring, and/or reproducing of partial or complete high -level 
computing logics from a  binary executable code  with out the original source codes.  The cou rse starts 
with introduction of  the relationship among  high level programming languages  and X86 ASM 
statements . It will then expand  to  the X86 instruction set architecture (ISA)  and its  computing models,   
and the compiler generated binary  executables . Through extensive hands -on exercises, assignments and 
tests, students will be guided to learn to develop the reserving strategy, starting from scope of reversing 
goal, hypothesis formation , iterative validation , selection of tool chains  for static and dynamic analysis , 
disassembling, up to validation of  reversing outcomes. The class also introduces basics of exploits , and 
defensive design against static and dynamic analysis.  
 
Students are required to learn about the basics of  legality and ethics of software reversing. The term 
hacking  refers to the process of exploiting vulnerability of software systems by manual or  automated 
processes. Learning about hacking practices is essential to build defensive software systems, but misuse 
of  the skills in the real -world environment can have serious legal consequences. RE related laws differ 
greatly in different  countr ies, region s, and types  of activities. Students are advised to take great 
cautions in their conducts. A “gut feeling, common sense” based mentality can lead to regrettable 
situations. In this class students will learn about selective legal cases related to real world RE cases .  
 
Course Prerequisites  
 
● Minimal requirement: CSCE 313, or instructor’s approval.  Students must be proficient in 
common HLL languages, programming, and common microprocessor architecture(s).  
● JR/SR classification, but exception can be made per instructor’s ap proval.    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 8 
● This class has extensive hands -on work. Students are advised to weigh their overall workload in 
taking this course.  
 
Special Course Designation  
 
N/A 
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
 
At end of the class, students should be proficient in the following aspects.  
 Identify common copyrights and other related laws governing software rights and their reverse 
engineering activities.  
 Gain knowledge on the relationship between HLL and Assembly statements.  
 Identify and utilize the knowledge on the compilation process to identify high level language programs 
and their machine code interpretations.  
 Extract the needed binary code structure information from the portable executable file formats.  
 Form ulation and optimization of reversing strategies (such as brute force based, or math logic based) 
to perform static & dynamic analysis of binary codes.  
 Survey of RE resources  
 Validation of disassembler outcomes.  
 Gain knowledge on anti -analysis techniques to protect binaries.  
 
Textbook and/or Resource Materials  
 
● None required  
● Reference books (not exclusive)  
● Assembly language for Intel based computers, by Irvine  
● The IDA Pro Book, by Chris Eagle  
● Reverse Engineering, secret of  reverse engineering, by Eldad Eilam  
● Practical Malware analysis, by M. Sikorski and A. Honig  
● Open literature, vendors technical information (Intel, Microsoft)  
● A laptop computer with sufficient performance  to run a designated Linux virtual machine,   
compilers and RE tools.  The laptop should also have large HDD space and main memory. Past 
experience suggests that common  laptops would be usable  for class activities, but lack of computing 
resources  can significantly affect the productivity or even classwork outcomes.   
● Major tools  
IDA Pro, Ghidra, Godbolt.org, Linux and compilers , various utility tools   
 
Grading Policy  
 
• Labs,  exercises, assignments   40%  
• Tests      40%    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 8 
• Final Project      20% 
• The grading scale : By numerical ranking of total scores.  
 
Special rules for graded team projects  
● Every student is required to contribute technical and documentation work.  
● If there is a project partner dispute, it is critical to report the issue quickly to the instructor or 
TA. Otherwise, you share grade consequences if the issues contribute to a poor grade.  
 
In most cases, you are encouraged to discuss assignments, but the final product submitted for grade 
must be the individual work of the person turning it in .   
Using third party codes and tools to solve challenging computing problems is critical to most software 
reverse engineering, and therefore is allowed. When doing so, it is a must to have full disclosure prior 
reporting results. Claiming credit without s uch disclosure will be considered cheating.  
 
Graded Attendance  –  
● All absences from graded activities – tests, quizzes and some timed lab exercises require prior 
approval of the instructor. Students without prior absence approval  may be allow ed to make up the 
missing activity with 2 5% or more grade penalty.  
● Students are responsible for any missed materials.   
● University excused absence are defined by student rule 7; see http://student -
rules.tamu.edu/rule07.  
● 3-strike rule: a final grade of D/F for m issing 3 graded activities.  
●  If advance notification is not possible (e.g. unexpected illness , family emergency ) for the absence, 
contact the instructor at the earliest time with some supporting evidence/document.  
 
 
Late Work Policy  
 
• Late work will be accepted up to one day late with a  25%  penalty .   
 
Course Schedule  
 
Week  (15) Topic  Assignments  
1 
2 
3 
 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
 
9 
10 High level languages (HLL) constructs (I)  
HLL constructs & ASM (II)  
Stack , accumulator -based processor ,  function call  
Mixed HLL & ASM programming (Godbolt) (I) 
HLL & ASM programming & DBG (Godbolt) (II) 
Binary reversing (I)  
Ethics & legality  
Binary reversing (II)  
Binary reversing  (III), Tool:  binary code visualization  
Rigi, CcNav  
Binary reversing (IV), Tool: Ghidra or IDA Pro  
Binary reversing ( V), Tool: Ghidra or IDA Pro , De-
compiler validation , semantic labeling  In class exercises /lab 
In class exercises /lab 
In class exercises/lab  
Quiz 1  
In class exercises/lab  
In class exercises/lab  
Reading and report  
In class exercises/lab  
In class demo, take home 
assignment  
In class follow along/lab , take home 
assignment    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 8 
 
    
11 Binary reversing  (VI): Password cracking  In class exercises/lab /timed test  
 
12 
 
13 
14 
15 Binary reversing (V II), Tool: Symbolic computing 
Z3/ANGR  
 Term projects – assigned binary images  
Term project  
Term project  
  
      
 
Optional Course Information Items  
 
N/A 
 
University Policies  
 
Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a student’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropriate by the instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obli gation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 8 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do. ” 
 
“Texas A&M University  students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inabilit y to authenticate one’s work, 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
Texas A&M at College Station  
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 
Texas A&M at Galveston  
You can learn more about the Honor Council Rules and Procedures as well as your rights and 
responsibilities at tamug.edu/HonorSystem . 
 
Texas A&M  at Qatar  
You can learn more about academic integrity and your rights and responsibilities at Texas A&M 
University at Qatar by visiting the Aggie Honor System  website.    
 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below)  
Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or 
chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with 
Disab ility Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Texas A&M at College Station  
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or visit 
disability.tamu.edu . 
 
Texas  A&M at Galveston  
Disability Resources is located in the Student Services Building or at (409) 740 -4587 or visit 
tamug.edu/counsel/Disabilities . 
 
Texas A&M at Qatar  
Disability Services is loca ted in the Engineering Building, room 318C or at +974.4423.0316 or visit 
https://www.qatar.tamu.edu/students/student -affairs/disability -services .   
 
   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 8 
Title IX and State ment on Limits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual 
harassment, includi ng sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, stud ent workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University.   
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper, class 
discussion, emai l, text, or social media post.  Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, a person who is subjected to the alleged conduct  will be able to control how the report is 
handled, including whether or not to pursue a formal investigation . The University’s goal is to make sure 
you are aware of the range of options available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
 
Texas A&M at College Station  
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (CAPS).  
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing suppor tive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are enco uraged to make an appointment 
with the Counseling Office in the Seibel Student Center, or call (409)740 -4587. For additional 
information, visit tamug.edu/counsel . 
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the Galveston Campus’ Title IX webpage . 
 
Texas A&M at Qatar  
Texas A&M University at Qatar students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are 
encouraged to visit the Health and Wellness  website for more information.  
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 8 
 
Statement on Mental Health and Wellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self -
care by utilizing availabl e resources and services on your campus  
 
Texas A&M College Station  
Students who need someone to talk to can contact Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS) or call the 
TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on wee kends. 24 -
hour emergency help is also available through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or 
at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Students who need someone to  talk to can call (409) 740 -4736 from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays or 
visit tamug.edu/counsel  for more information. For 24 -hour emergency assistance during nights and 
weekends, contact the TAMUG Police Dept at (409) 740 -4545. 24 -hour emergency help is also available 
through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org . 
 
Texas A&M at Qatar  
Texas A&M University at Qatar students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are 
encouraged to visit the Health and Wellness  website for more informati on.   
 
Campus -Specific Policies  
 
Texas A&M at Galveston  
Classroom Access and Inclusion Statement  
Texas A&M University is committed to engaged student participation in all of its programs and courses 
and provides an accessible academic environment for all  students. This means that our classrooms, our 
virtual spaces, our practices and our interactions are as inclusive as possible and we work to provide a 
welcoming instructional climate and equal learning opportunities for everyone. If you have an 
instructio nal need, please notify me as soon as possible.  
The Aggie Core values of respect, excellence, leadership, loyalty, integrity and selfless service in addition 
to civility, and the ability to listen and to observe others are the foundation of a welcoming ins tructional 
climate. Active, thoughtful and respectful participation in all aspects of the course supports a more 
inclusive classroom environment as well as our mutual  responsibilities to the campus community . 
 
Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)  
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to 
these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records and to 
provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate  and misleading data through informal and formal 
hearings. Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items may 
do so by going to howdy.tamu.edu  and clicking on the "Directory Hold Information" link in the Student   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 8 
Records channel on the MyRecord tab. The complete FERPA N otice to Students  and the student 
records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.   
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student’s social security number, 
citizenship, gender, grades, GPR or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your 
privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your 
participation in the class.  
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email add ress, local telephone 
number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, 
campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees honors and awards received, 
participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location and medical 
residence specialization.  
 
 