Course Syllabus
 Edit
Course Information
 
Course Information
Course Number: CSCE 350  
Course T itle: Computer Organization and Design  
Section: 500, 501, 502, 503  
Time:  MWF 10:20AM to 1 1:10AM  
Location: ZACH 310
Lab: Tuesday and Thursday 08:25AM - 09:15AM, 09:35AM - 10:25AM, 1 1:35AM - 12:25PM and
12:45PM -01:35PM  
Location: ZACH 592
Credit Hours: 4
 
Instructor Details
Instructor: Abdullah Muzahid  
Office: Peterson 206  
Phone:  979-458-1059  
E-Mail: abdullah.muzahid@tamu.edu  
Office Hours: MW 9.00 AM to 10 AM online via zoom  
https://tamu.zoom.us/j/96231447885?pwd=K2hKY251SWgzU2crTGtoc2gyN0JIUT09
Meeting ID: 962 3144 7885  
Passcode: 362173  
One tap mobile  
+13462487799,,96231447885# US (Houston)
 
TA Details
Name: Vahid Janfaza  
Email: vahidjanfaza@tamu.edu  (mailto:vahidjanfaza@tamu.edu)Office Hours: TBA
 
Course Description
Computer architecture and design; use of register transfer languages and simulation tools to describe
and simulate computer operation; central processing unit organization, microprogramming, input/output
and memory system architectures. Cross-listed with CSCE 350.
 
Course Prerequisites
ECEN 248 - Introduction to Digital Systems
 
Required Book
David Patterson and John Hennessy , “Computer Organization and Design: The hardware/software
interface”,  ARM EDITION , 2016 or newer . Electronic versions are OK.  
(note: it must be the "ARM" edition, no other edition is usable for this class ) 
 
Course Learning Outcomes
The goal of this course is to provide the student with a working knowledge of different methods for logic
representation, manipulation, and optimization, for both combinational and sequential logic. At the end of
the course the student should be able to view the design of digital systems from a new perspective and
have an understanding of several fundamental concepts that can be applied to a wide variety of digital
design problems. List one or more learning outcomes for the course.
Individual Course Objectives:  
At the end of this course, students should:
Understand the organization of a computer system including the CPU datapath, CPU control, and
memory systems
Understand the impact of semiconductor technology on computer design and architecture.
Understand the basics and principles of instruction set design.
Be familiar with programming using an assembly level language.
Understand the impact of instruction sets on hardware design.
Be familiar with designing datapaths for a processor .
Understand the implications of branch instructions on program flow and hardware design.
Understand the performance implications of various factors such as clock speed, average clock
cycles per instruction and number of instructions.Understand the role of compilers and high-level languages in programming.
Be familiar with designing control circuitry for a basic processor .
Understand the dif ferences in single-cycle/multicycle design of processors.
Be familiar with processor pipelining.
Understand the implications of pipelining on memory design, instruction set design, compiling,
performance etc.
Understand the implications of branch instructions on pipelining.
Understand basics of memory technology , registers, SRAM, DRAM.
Understand the performance issue of various memory technologies.
Be familiar with the notion of locality .
Understand the memory architectures including cache architectures.
Be familiar with various cache architectures: direct-mapped, set-associative, wide/narrow block size
etc.
Understand the concepts of virtual memory .
Be familiar with the need for address translation.
Understand the impact of address translation on cache/memory accesses.
Be familiar with hardware designs of various cache architectures.
Understand the basics of Input/Output.
Understand the principles of instruction-level parallelism (ILP) and processor microarchitectures
which exploit it.
Understand the principles of thread-level parallelisms and processor microarchitecture which exploit
it.
Understand register-transfer level (R TL) system concepts and description methods, including a
hardware description language (VERILOG)
 
Grading Policy
Breakdown:
Exams (2 Exams) 40%
Labs 35%
Quizzes 20%
Attendance 5%
 
Grading Scale:
A: 90-100%
B: 80-89%
C: 70-79%D: 60-69%
F: 0-59%
Note: in the event that the average overall grade of all students lies below a 79% there will be a curve on
the overall grade.  I will not curve the individual exams and assignments.
Attendance: 
Students are expected to attend and be active discussion participants during the lectures (answering
questions posed, asking questions, commenting etc.).  Students who attends less than 50% lectures will
receive a 0 for this part of their grade.    
Exams:
There will be two exams. The second exam will be comprehensive, but with an emphasis on the material
covered since the first exam.  
Tentative T est schedule:  
Exam 1 – March 04, 2022  
Exam 2 –  May-09-2022
Assignments/Quizzes:
Rather than traditional homework, this course will rely upon a series of on-line quiz assessments.  The
goal of these quizzes will be to test your knowledge of the lecture material and pinpoint which lectures
you should go back and review on-line.  There will be one quiz for each lecture, this quiz must be
completed prior to the next lecture.
Students may retake the quiz as many times as desired between its release and the next lecture.  If the
quiz is submitted in the same day as the due time, it will be graded with full credit. If it is delayed
by few days (up to a week), you will get 50% grade. Otherwise, you will get 0.
The T AMU Canvas system will be used for all quiz submissions.
Labs:
The course will have nine prelabs and nine labs (tentative).  Prelabs are expected to be
completed  before  attending the associated lab session. Late prelabs will have 50% of the points
deducted for being one working day late, more than 2 days late will not be accepted.
Generally , post-labs and demos must be completed the week following the lab's introduction (the
exception being a couple labs that take two weeks).  Late post-labs  will have 20% of the points deducted
for being late up to 1-week. If a post-lab and/or demo is late for more than a week then, a grade of 0 will
be assigned. 
Lectures:Lectures will be in person in the classroom. All students are expected to be active participants during
lecture.  
Course Topics/Schedule:
Hours:   T opic 
3 hours: Overview of Computer Architecture  
3 hours: Instruction Set Architectures (ISA), Representing instructions on the computer , Arithmetical and
logical instructions, Memory access instructions
3 hours: Instruction Set Architectures (ISA), Control flow instructions, Function calls instructions, Input-
output instructions SPIM- instruction set simulator  
3 hours: Computer Arithmetic, Signed and unsigned numbers, Addition and subtraction, Multiplication,
Division, Floating point operations  
3 hours: T ranslating and starting a program, Compilers, compiler optimization, Object code generation,
assemblers, linking, Run-time execution environment  
3 hours: Performance evaluation, CPU performance and its factors, performance metrics, performance
factors, comparing performance, SPEC benchmarks  
2 hours: Hardware Description Languages, V erilog hardware description language, Design-Simulation
Process, Structural Designs in V erilog Behavioral HDL Description of Systems  
3 hours: Datapath and Control, and ALU design  
3 hours: Single-cycle implementation  
3 hours: Microprogramming, catchup  
3 hours: Pipelining, Pipelined datapath  
4 hours: Pipelined control, Pipeline hazards: structural, control, data hazard detection and resolution,
exception handling  
4 hours: Memory Hierarchy , Overview of SRAM and DRAM design, Basic of caches, Framework for
memory hierarchy , Measuring memory performance
 
Late W ork Policy
See above for late policy on Quizzes, Prelabs and Labs. Work submitted by a student as makeup work
for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempted from the late work policy .  
 
University Policies
This section outlines the university level policies. The T AMU Faculty Senate established the wording of
these policies.Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility . Students
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer to Student Rule 7  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) in its entirety for information
about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
 
Makeup W ork Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance
contributes to a student’ s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed
appropriate by the instructor .
Please refer to Student Rule 7  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) in its entirety for information
about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to T itle IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more
than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) ).
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2  (https://student-
rules.tamu.edu/rule07/) ).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student
Conduct Code. ( See Student Rule 24  (https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule24/) .)
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor . If
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student.
Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’ s work, should the
instructor request it, may be suf ficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case” ( Section
20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20  (https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu/Rules-and-Procedures/Rules/Honor-System-
Rules) ).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Of fice Rules and Procedures, academic integrity ,
and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor .tamu.edu  (https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu/) .[NOTE : Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this Academic Integrity
Statement and Policy . Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language and
location at their site.]
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a
disability , please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845-1637 or
visit disability .tamu.edu  (https://disability.tamu.edu/) . Disabilities may include, but are not limited to
attentional, learning, mental health, sensory , physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are
encouraged to discuss their disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as
soon as possible.
[NOTE : Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this Americans with
Disabilities Act Policy statement. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language
and location at their site.]
 
Title IX and Statement on Limits to Confidentiality
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all.
University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender-based discrimination and sexual
harassment, including sexual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and
stalking.
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full
and part-time faculty , staf f, paid graduate assistants, student workers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters
and must report to the T itle IX Of fice if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1  (https://rules-
saps.tamu.edu/PDFs/08.01.01.M1.pdf) ):
The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.
The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2) an employee of the University .
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention –
including but not limited to face-to-face conversations, a written class assignment or paper , class
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most
instances, you will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a
formal investigation. The University’ s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment
with Counseling and Psychological Services  (https://caps.tamu.edu/) (CAPS).
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the T itle
IX investigation and resolution process on the University’ s Title IX webpage  (https://titleix.tamu.edu/) .
[NOTE : Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this T itle IX and
Statement on Limits of Liability . Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language
and location at their site.]
 
Statement on Mental Health and W ellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a
student’ s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self-
care by utilizing the resources and services available from Counseling & Psychological Services
(CAPS). Students who need someone to talk to can call the T AMU Helpline (979-845-2700) from 4:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24-hour emergency help is also available
through the National Suicide Prevention Hotline
 
COVID-19 Guidance
Please follow the university guidance for COVID-19. The latest guidance is here
COVID 19 Guidance  (https://covid.tamu.edu/)
