   SYLLABUS  
 
 
 
Course title and number  Information Storage and Retrieval , CSCE470  
Term  Spring  2022 
Meeting times and location  8-9:15 am, Tu/Th, HRBB 124  
 
Course Description and Prerequisites  
 
This course will introduce  the key concepts , models, algorithms and techniques at the 
core of modern text-based search systems. The topics covered in  this course  includ e 
efficient text indexing,  Boolean,  vector space and probabilistic retrieval models, retrieval 
evaluation, relevance feedback, docu ment classification, learning to rank, document 
clustering and link analysis. The students will have an opportunity to implement key 
retrieval models on top of an open -source search engine system.   
 
Prerequisites: CSCE 315 and junior or senior standing; or  approval of the instructor. In 
addition, students should have had some exposure to basic probability, statistics, data 
structures and algorithms. You should be able to learn new software libraries on your 
own and design and develop functions on top.  
 
 
Learning Outcomes  or Course Objectives  
 
The main objective of this course is to equip  students with solid theoretical knowledge and enough 
practical experience to develop and diagnose their own search systems in the future.  Upon 
successful completion of the course, a student will be able to:  
 
• Define and explain the key concepts and models relevant to information storage and retrieval.  
• Implement important algorithms, recognize and fix common problems in practice.   
• Design  and develop  his/her own text search systems addressing  customized information 
needs . 
 
 
Instructor Information  
 
Name Ruihong Huang  
Telephone number  979-862-2908  
Email address  huangrh@cse.tamu.edu  
Office hours  TBD 
Office location  Online  
 
Textbook and/or Resource Material  
 
 
The primary textbook: Introduction to Information Retrieval, Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar 
Raghavan, and Hinrich Schutze, Cambridge University Press. 2008.  
 
Instructor will provide copies of lecture slides and links to resources on the internet.  
 
 
Gradin g Policies  
 
The course grading policy is as follows: two programming assignments (30%), four written 
assignments (20%), class participation (5%), class project (25%) and final exam  (20%). Class 
  participation  will be measured through attendance in class, submission of  assignments and 
participation in online piazza discussions.   
 
The late policy is: for the programming/written homework assignments, you have a total of 5 late days 
that you can use during the sem ester. However, a single assignment can be submitted up to 2 days 
late only. For the purposes of the class, a late day is an indivisible 24 -hour unit. Once you exhaust 
your 5 late days, we will not accept any late submissions .  
 
 
Grading Scale  
 
The grading scale is : A: 90 -100, B: 80 -89, C: 70 -79, D: 60 -69, F: 0 -59. Scores are rounded up.  
 
 
Attendance / Make -up Work Policies  
 
The University views class attendance as the responsibility of an individual student. Attendance is 
essential to complete the course successfully. University rules related to excused/unexcused absences 
and make -up work are located on -line at http://student -rules.tamu.edu/rule07 . 
 
 
Course Topics , Calendar of Activities, Major Assignment  Dates  (Tentative)  
 
 
Week  Topic   
1 Overview and indexing   
2 The Boolean Retrieval model    
3 Probabilistic IR: Vector space model  & BM25 , #1 written assignment due   
4 Probabilistic IR: Language Models   
5 Retrieval Evaluation, #1 programming assignment due   
6 Retrieval Feedback   
7 Document Classification, #2 written assignment due   
8 Learning to Rank   
9 Flat Clustering: K -means, #2 Programming assignment due   
10 Hierarchical Clustering: HAC   
11 Link Analysis, #3 written assignment due   
12 Trending Topics, #4 written assignment due   
13 Trending Topics   
14 Project Presentations   
 
 
Other Pertinent Course Information  
 
 
 
 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)  
 
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Stud ent Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or 
visit http://disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities may include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss t heir 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.  
 
Academic Integrity  
For additional information please visit: http://aggiehonor.tamu.edu   
 
 