 
Page 1 of 15 
  
 
Course Information  
 
Course  Number:  CSCE 402/702 ; CYBR 602  
Course  Title:  Cybersecurity Law & Policy  
    Section:      CSCE  402/500; CSCE 702/600 /CYBR 602/600  
 
Time:  T, TR 3:55  – 5:10 p.m.  
Location:  ZACH 310  
Credit  Hours:  3 
 
 
Instructor Details  
 
Instructor:  Paula deWitte, J.D., Ph.D., P.E.  
Office:  Peterson 225  
Phone:  Preferred mode of communication is email.  
E-Mail:  paula.dewitte@tamu.edu  
If in reference to homework or exams, please copy the Senior Graders:  
 Stuart Nelson at s.s.nelson@tamu.edu  
 Lakhan Saiteja Kamireddy  at lakhan@tamu.edu  
 
    Office  Hour s:     Thursday 1 – 2 p.m.  (in office) or by appointment  (in office or by Zoom)   
 
Course Description  
This course examines law and policy issues related to cybersecurity for the spectrum of cybersecurity 
jobs including those defined in the NIST NICE Framework (procurement, operations/maintenance, 
governance and oversight, protection/defense, analysis, intelligence collection/operation; and 
investigation) cybersecurity jobs. Tomorrow’s cyber workers are exposed to more data and privacy 
issues that requ ires them to analyze law, policies, and regulations both under United States jurisdiction 
and internation al jurisdiction (Spoiler Alert:  The internet has changed our traditional notion of 
jurisdiction!) .  Law is traceable and based on precedent while techn ology is disruptive.  Law necessarily 
lags technology resulting in an uncertain legal and ethical framework which requires cyber workers to 
be able to analyze and distinguish appropriate courses of action as part of their daily tasks without the 
luxury of relying on legal counsel.  This is especially crucial given the dynamics of the threat and 
response landscape,   The course will focus on international and federal law and not specific state data 
breach laws other than a cursory review and explanation of w hen states or federal has jurisdiction.  
Course Syllabus  
  
Page 2 of 15 
    
The course first examines the fundamentals and basics of law – jurisdiction, due diligence, 
case/controversy, standing, statute of limitations, remedies/damages, and evidence standards – to 
establish a foundation to apply and analyze legal issues that are especially problematic regarding 
cybersecurity. The course then explores the national and international legal frameworks that govern 
cybersecurity and their implications for attacks, motives, responses, and counte r-attacks through the 
lens of what is permissible against attacking individuals or entities versus attacking nation -states 
including legal issues such as “hacking back” and problems such as accurate attack attribution.  The 
course then examines the legal i ssues raised by the cloud related to privacy and third partie s including 
emerging standards.  The overarching goal of this course is to provide a cyber -worker  in technical, 
business or policy domains with the knowledge and skills to better interpret threats  and responses in a 
national and international law framework while understanding (and being sympathetic to) the limits of 
the current law and how law/policy can evolve for cybersecurity.  This course is not intended to make 
you lawyers, but rather legal -savvy cyber workers.   
 
The course includes current events discussion on relevant information and relies on extensive analysis 
of laws and policies whereby students will demonstrate their knowledge and skills by preparing short 
written assignments throughout  the semester.   
 
Course  Prerequisites  
 
Junior , senior , or graduate  classification.   Preferred to have some programming experience although not 
required.  
 
Special Course Designation  
 
This is a stacked course. A ll assignments and exams for undergraduate and graduate students are 
weighted differently as explained in the Grading Policy section  below  with all sections  having the same 
assignments  and exams .  
 
Course Learning Outcomes  
Upon successful completion of this co urse, a student will be able to:  
 
• Acquire the common body of knowledge for cybersecurity law including concepts and legal 
terminology.   
• Acquire the common body of knowledge related to both national and international laws 
related to cybersecurity and the d ifferences between United States law and laws of other 
jurisdictions.   
• Identify and explain common legal issues related to cybersecurity.  
• Provide a high -level explanation of the legal issues governing the authorized conduct of cyber 
operations and the use  of related tools, techniques, technology, and data.  
• Apply legal concepts in issues related to cybersecurity including cases/controversies unique to 
cybersecurity.   
• Assess  and explain legal procedural requirements relevant to cybersecurity.  
• Demonstrate th e ability to use legal knowledge by analyzing cybersecurity issues from a cyber 
worker perspective such as whether a security incident violates a privacy principle or legal 
standard requiring specific legal action.    
Page 3 of 15 
 • Demonstrate the ability to work through  a case study identifying legal issues, analyzing the 
cybersecurity action required, and formulating a plan that complies with applicable laws.   
• Identify  the authorities applicable to a cyber -security operations scenario.  
• Evaluate the relationship between ethics and law, describe civil disobedience and its relation to 
ethical hacking, describe criminal penalties related to unethical hacking, and apply the notion of 
“grey areas” to describing situations where law has not yet caught up to  technological 
innovation.  
• Describe steps for carrying out ethical penetration testing, describe 'ethical hacking' principles 
and conditions, distinguish between ethical and unethical hacking, and distinguish between 
nuisance hacking, activist hacking, cri minal hacking, and acts of war.  
 
Textbook and/or Resource Materials  
 
Required Text  
• Cybersecurity Law, 2nd Edition  by Jeff Kosseff, ISBN -13: 978-1119517207  
We will read all chapters (1 – 11) and selected Appendices as references.   
I recommend that you buy this book!  
 
Referenced Text s: 
• Tallinn Manual 2.0 on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Operations  by Michael N. Schmitt, ISBN 978 -
1-316-82252 -4.  I do not recommend that you buy this book!  
• You’ll see this message when it is too late  by Josephine Wolff,  ISBN 978 -0-262—3885 -0. 
• Twenty -six Words that Created the Internet  by Jeff Kosseff, ISBN -10: 1501714414.  
• This is How They Tell Me the World Ends  by Nicole Perlroth, ISBN -10  :  1635576059 . 
• Other readings as assigned and either placed on Google Scholar  or communicated with web references.  
 
Grading Policy  
 
The student’s semester grade will be based on assignments, exams, and a semester paper.   
 
Weekly/Bi -Weekly Assignments (5) : There will be a total of 5 writing assignment. The topics for these 
assignments can be found in the course sched ule. Each assignment should be answered in 1-2 pages 
according to the template  posted on the GOOGLE SCHOLAR  Learning Management System  for this  class . 
 
Semester Paper:  Students should  select a topic to write for this paper  before the fifth week of class . 
The requirements for the paper and the rubric for grading will be posted on the GOOGLE SCHOLAR  
Learning Management System  for this class .  
 
Exams:  Two major exams wil l be given in this course at five and ten weeks during the course. Both 
exams will be essay tests . A final exam will be short answer and cover material from the last lectures.  
 
   
Page 4 of 15 
 Course grades will be assigned using the following scale:  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Assignments Rubric  
 
The rubric for the assignment is based on IRAC : Issue + Rule + Analysis + Conclusion  
 
20% Issue :  Did you come up with a relevant legal issue related to the course, and did you tie that issue to 
the course?  Did you explain the problem/issue  clearly ? (If you fail to describe an issue, it will be 
difficult to analyze.)  
20% Rule :  What makes this a relevant legal issue?  What rules of law are you applying?  Did you do a 
thorough research,  that is clearly communicated ? 
20% Analysis :  You do not merely re -state the rule and research , but analyze what is leading to your 
subsequent conclusion. Tie your analysis to course knowledge to demonstrate what you learned from 
this course.  This is also a good time to bring up any vo ids or gaps in current laws or to differentiate 
legal and ethical issues.  
20%  Conclusions: Clearly state the conclusions based on the issue, rule, and analysis and ensure that there 
is a logical pathway to follow.  
20% Presentation : formatting, proper grammar, correct spelling, proper use of words, proper 
capitalization (e.g., Congress referring to the United States Congress is always capitalized as is the 
First Amendment.  These are proper nouns.).   
 Points Grading Scale : 
Out of 1000  assignable points  
A 900 - 1000 points  
B 800 - 899 points  
C 700 - 799 points  
D 600 - 699 points  
F < 600 points  Requirement:    Undergraduate  
Points   Graduate  
Points  
Weekly/Bi -Weekly Assignments  (5 
assignments each worth 50pts for 
undergraduate students and 40 
points for graduate students )  250 (25%)  200 (20%) 
Semester Paper  250 (25%) 300 (30%) 
First Exam  200 (20%) 200 (20%) 
Second Exam    200 (20%) 200 (20%) 
Third  Exam  100 (10%)  100 (10%)  
Total  1000  (100%)  1000  (100%)   
Page 5 of 15 
   
Semester Paper Rubric  
 
The ru bric for the semester paper is:   
 
20%  Idea selection and explanation :  Did you come up with a good idea for the course, and did you tie 
that idea to the course?  Did you explain the problem/issue?  
20%  Research process :  Did you do good research, and is it clearly shown?  
20%  Analysis :  You do not merely re -state the research.  You apply analysis and tie it to course knowledge 
to demonstrate what you learned from this course.  
20%  Presentation : formatting, proper grammar, correct spelling, proper use of words, proper 
capitalization (e.g., Congress referring to the United States Congress is always capitalized as is the 
First Amendment.  These are proper nouns.).  
20%  Style : How well does this paper read?  How well do you organize your ideas?  How well do y ou reach 
logical conclusions based on your own arguments?  Is the paper substantial?  
 
• Semester Paper Requirements:   
o Page Requirement :  
▪ Undergraduate 5 - 7 Pages ( Note : 5 complete pages are required. Not 4 and a half 
pages) ; Five pages of content excludin g sources  
▪ Graduate 7 – 8 Pages (Note: 7 complete pages are required. Not 6 and a half pages);  
o Margins : 1" on all sides  
o Line Spacing : 1.5  
o Font : Calibri 11  Preferred; no bigger than 12 point font  
o References Required :  Minimum of 10 valid references  
 
Late Work Policy  
 
Late work is work that is not turned in according to the class process by the assigned due date. The instructor may 
accept late work if the student notifies the instructor BEFORE the assigned due date  except In truly emergency 
situations.   
 
Typically, late and/or make -up work will not be accepted without a university excused absence. (See  Student Rule 
7.) If an absence is excused, then the student will be provided an opportunity to make up any homework 
assignments, quizzes, exams, or other work that contributes to the final grade with a due date that extends the 
original due date by the number of days of the  excused absence.  Individual arrangements will be made for exams 
and quizzes missed due to an excused absence.  In all cases, TAMU Student Rule 7 will govern the process.    
 
   
Page 6 of 15 
 Course Schedule  
 
Date  Topics  Assignment Milestones  
Week 1  
 
Jan 18 - 
20 Introduction to Course & 
Expectations.  Walk -through 
course syllabus. Discussion of 
Semester Paper.  
 
Using on -line resources and 
finding relevant current events.  
 
Differences between engineering 
and legal mindsets (“ It depends.”).  
  
Basic cybersecurity terminology 
and concepts.  (1st Lecture)  
 
Overview of the American legal 
system  
Legal concepts: Due diligence, 
Jurisdiction, Standing;  
Venue; Case/Controversy, Statute 
of Limitations; Evidence   
Standards (Civil vs Criminal); 
Remedies/Damage s; 
“Reasonableness standards,” etc.  
 
Other American legal concepts:  
Right to face accuser, double 
jeopardy, the role of “public 
policy” in court decisions, etc.  
 
Legal Infrastructure:  
State and federal laws.   
Federal executive, legislative, and 
judicial  branches.  
Appellate review process —federal 
and state (or how a federal law 
can be interpreted differently 
within different areas of the US).  
 
Whew!  And that’s just week 1!  
How fun was that!  Reading Kosseff Chapter 1 this week is essential .  The 
remaining reading can be in the next few weeks.  Don’t be 
overwhelmed!  This is background material (but – it’s so 
interesting! ). 
 
Read Kosseff Chapter 1: Data Security  
Laws and Enforcement Actions (skip Section 3.1 pp 48 - 
56); don’t  worry about s pecific case names and 
descriptions; focus on “Key Lessons” and look for the 
commonality in those key lessons for class discussion.   
 
Appendix A: Section 5 of the FTC Act  
  
Focus specifically on legal terminology and concepts as 
discussed in class.  
 
Read SANS Paper:  OPM vs. APT: How Proper 
Implementation of Key Controls Could Have Prevented a 
Disaste r (on GOOGLE SCHOLAR ).  Periodically through the 
semester, we’ll refer to this SANS paper.  As your legal 
analysis knowledge grows, you will realize how much you 
have learned using this paper as your guide.  Your first read 
will probably be overwhelming.  Your  last read of the 
semester will be – I know that!   
   
Read US Constitution (Articles I, II, III, IV, and VI).   
http://constitutionus.com/  and 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution  
 
Read Federal Courts  and what they do:  
https://www.fjc.gov/content/federal -courts -and-what -
they -do-2 
 
At the end of Week 1, you may  not be able to recall all 
concepts and terminology from memory, however you 
should be able to analyze how and where to find the 
answer!   We will refer to this as our framework of legal 
analysis that we will use through the rest of the course.  
 
And rememb er – first step -- always check to see if a term 
has a legal definition!   
Page 7 of 15 
    
Week 2  
 
Jan 25 - 
27 Continuation of Legal Terminology 
and Concepts from Week 1  
 
Common law (state) civil causes of 
action:  Contract breach; breach 
of implied warranty; negligence; 
unjust enrichment; fraud; slander; 
invasion of privacy.  
 
Privileges:  Attorney -client, Work 
Product Doctrine, and Non -
testifying Expert … in anticipation 
of litigation  
 
The concept of “standing” – 
Article III of the Constitution and 
SCOTUS inte rpretation  
 
Fun facts:  Google the cases in the 
footnotes regarding standing on 
pages 52 – 53, especially 
Whitmore v. Arkansas for the type 
of case/controversy.   
Whoa!  Did not see that 
coming!!!!  
 
Putting it all together to bring a 
cybersecurity case to court — 
walk -thru the legal process —both 
civil and criminal.   
 
(Free legal advice:  Never ever 
ignore when served by a court of 
competent jurisdiction.   
Never.  Ever. ).   Read Kosseff Chapter 2: Cyb ersecurity Litigation and  
 
We will emphasize the legal concept of standing and how 
lack of standing affects cybersecurity cases.   
 
We will not discuss specific state consumer protection or 
data breach laws.   
 
Assignment 1:  Write a one -to-two page  paper  on a 
fundamental legal issue as being confusing/critical to 
cybersecurity .  
Due in one wee k. Submit through GOOGLE SCHOLAR .   
5% of course grade for undergraduate students and 4% of 
course grade for graduate  students .   
 
 
Week 3  
 
Feb 1 - 3 Privacy (“ The right to be let 
alone ”):  Is there a “right” to 
privacy?  If so, how do we define 
privacy so that we can effectively 
legislate protecting that right?   
 
Legislative:   Read Kosseff Chapter 7: Surveillance and Cyber and  
Appendix E: Electronic Communicat ions Privacy Act  
 
Read Kosseff Chapter 9: Privacy Laws  
 
Read Kosseff Chapter 10 (Section 10.1, pages 386 – 396)  
 
  
Page 8 of 15 
 The Privacy Act (1974);  
The Stored Communications Act 
(1986)  
The Wiretap Act ( Title III of the 
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
Streets  Act of 1968)  
The Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act (1986) —amendment 
to the Wiretap Act  
 
Judicial:   SCOTUS opinions on 
privacy (Griswold v. Connecticut, 
Roe v Wade, Lawrence v. Texas), 
expectation of privacy (Katz v. 
United States), recent decisions 
strengthening 4th Amendment 
protections (Carpenter v United 
States).   
 
4th Amendment :  Review of 
SCOTUS  decisions on the 
requirements for Fourth 
Amendment Warrants.  What’s 
next after Carpenter v United 
States?  
 
14th Amendment:  Review of 
Scotus decisions on due process.   US Constitution Amendments 1, 3, 4, and 5  
 
Assigned readings on Google Scholar   
Shocker:  NYT article on Google Scholar :  “Roe v. Wade 
Was About More Than Abortion”  [Note this statement 
from the article:   “The a nswer is that Roe’s definition of 
privacy seemed different. More than other Supreme Court 
decisions, it connected privacy to ideas about individual 
identity and choice.” … and then ho w this definition of 
privacy has been used in subsequent legal actions.]  
 
 
 
Week 4  
 
Feb 8 - 
10 Federal Laws on Hacking Back:   
Computer Fraud Abuse Act -- 
CFAA (1986) and proposed 
revisions; effect on hacking back  
Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(1998).  
 Read Kosseff Chapter 5: Anti -Hacking  
Laws and  
Appendix C: Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA) and  
Appendix D: Computer Fraud and Abuse Act  
 
  Assigned paper(s) on “hacking back;”   
 
Read:  2018 National Cyber Strategy  
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp -
content/uploads/2018/09/National -Cyber -Strategy.pdf    
 
and the companion document:  
https://media.defense.gov/2018/Sep/18/2002041658/ -
1/-1/1/CYBER_STRATEGY_SUMMARY_FINAL.PDF   
Page 9 of 15 
  
and the Solarium Report either the Executive Summary 
(22 pages) or the report (182 pages)  
 
Assignment 2:  Research the legal issues of privacy 
related to cybersecuri ty and write a one -to-two page  
paper  discussing some l egal issue.   
 Due in one wee k. Submit through GOOGLE SCHOLAR .   
5% of course grade for undergraduate students and 4% 
of course grade for graduate  students.  
 
Week 5  
 
Feb 15 
– 17  US Federal Cybersecurity Laws:  
 
Legislative:   FISMA (Federal 
Information Security 
Management Act) and how it 
relates to common law 
recognition of NIST Standards 
and FIPS 199 and FIPS 200  
 
NIST Standards in a Legal Sense:  
Documentation and how  
applying good cybersecu rity 
practices may  cause  legal risk !   
[Note:  NIST is NOT a federal 
regulatory  agency.]  
 
Executive:  (1) Presidential 
Directives and Introduction to 
Executive Orders. (2) Executive 
agencies (e.g., FTC). (3) Federal 
agencies —later lecture.  
 
Judicial:  Commo n law.  
 
Take -home Exam 1!  Read Kosseff Chapter 8: Cybersecurity and Federal 
Government Contractors   
 
Readings as assigned.  Obviously one excellent source is 
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/sp800  (as discussed and 
navigated in class).  
 
Review SANS paper on OPM regarding NIST controls  
 
 
Should have selected a topic for a semester paper by this 
week.   
Week 6  
 
Feb 22 - 
24  
Cybersecurity and the Cloud:  
FEDRAMP  
 
Catch up week – this is our first 
semester “breather” week to 
either catch up (if we’re behind) 
and/or to take time to fully Readings as assigned.  Obviously one excellent source is 
www.fedramp.gov . 
 
Assignment 3: Write a one -to-two page  paper  on a  
specific NIST family of controls (pick out one or two 
controls) and think through any legal issues that should 
be considered.  This is where the OPM pap er might 
provide some ideas.    
Page 10 of 15 
 digest information so far.  At 
least one lecture will be devoted 
to “Point/Counterpoint” 
classroom discussion where 
students will b e given positions 
and argue whether to defend or 
reject.  More fun if your assigned 
position is counter to your 
personal beliefs.  Due in one week.   
 Due in one wee k. Submit through GOOGLE SCHOLAR .   
5% of course grade for undergraduate students and 4% of 
course grade for graduate  students . 
 
 
 
Week 7  
 
Mar 1 - 
3 Scope and effect of federal 
regulations and how enforced.  
 
Regulatory Agencies (FTC, FCC, 
SEC, CFPB, DHS, Department of 
Education; other 
financial/banking regulations) 
relative to cybersecurity and/or 
privacy.  
 Kosseff Chapter 3 (skip Section 3.7 pp 147 – 154) 
Cybersecurity Requireme nts for Specific Industries ;   
 
Kosseff Chapter 4 Cybersecurity and Corporate 
Governance  
 
Week 8  
 
Mar 8 – 
10  International Law:  Tallinn Manual 
2.0 on International Law on Cyber 
Operations:  
 
Sovereignty  
Due diligence  
Jurisdiction  
 
United Nations Charter (Jus ad 
bellum)  
 
Hague Conventions & Geneva 
Conventions (Jus in bello)  Read Kosseff Chapter 10: International Cybersecurity Laws 
and Chapter 11: Cyber and the Law of War  
 
Read Chapters 1, 2, & 3 of the Tallinn Manual:  
Sovereignty, Due Diligence, and Jurisdiction  
 
Skim through Table of Contents and organization of 
Tallinn Manual  
 
PLEASE DO NOT CONFUSE THE TALLINN MANUAL 2.0 AS 
ACTUAL BINDING INTERNATIONAL LAW!!!!!  
Mar 14 
– 18  Spring Break!   
Week 9  
 
Mar 22 
-24   
Posse comitatus  
 
Other federal laws of interest.  Read Kosseff 6.4 Military Involvement in Cybersecurity 
and Posse Comitatus  
 
 
Week 
10 
 
Mar 29 
- 31  
 
Take -home Exam #2!    
Page 11 of 15 
 Week 
11 
 
Apr 5 - 
7 Critical Infrastructure as a 
cybersecurity threat.   
 
Executive:   Presidential 
Directives and Executive Orders 
related to Securing Critical 
Infrastructure and the United 
States Patriot Act.    
 
Legislative:   The Cybersecurity 
Information Sharing Act  -- CISA 
(2015),  
Cybersecurity   
Enhancement Act (2014);  
 
NIST Cybersecurity Framework  Read Kosseff Chapter 6: U.S. Government Cyber 
Structure and Public -Private Partnerships  
 
Assignment 4: Research a legal issue related to 
protecting critical infrastructure fr om one of the critical 
infrastructure sectors and write a one -to-two page  paper   
Due in one week.   
 Due in one wee k. Submit through GOOGLE SCHOLAR .   
5% of course grade for undergraduate students and 4% of 
course grade for graduate  students . 
Week 
12 
 
Apr 12 - 
14 Intellectual Property Theft as a 
Cyber Threat   
 
Legislative:   Economic Espionage 
Act (1996)  
 
Uniform Trade Secrets Act -- 
UTSA (1985)  Assigned readings.  
Week 
13 
 
Apr 19 - 
21 Cyber Ethics:  What’s right, 
what’s wrong, what’s legal, and 
what’s ethical.  
 
New and emerging  issues in 
cybersecurity law & policy since 
class started.  
 Semester papers du e! – 25% of course grade for CSCE 402 
& MARA 403, 35% for CSCE 702 . 
 
Assignment 5: Summarize and write a one -to-two page  
paper  on your assessment of the current state of ethics in 
cybersecurity – think through the Tallinn Manual, hacking 
back, CFAA, etc. and class discussions.  Potential topics 
could include some aspect that causes controversy or 
conflict w ith US law.   
Due in one wee k. Submit through GOOGLE SCHOLAR .   
5% of course grade for undergraduate students and 4% of  
course grade for graduate  students . 
Week 
14 
 
Apr 26 - 
28 In class Exam  #3. 
 
Course Evaluations;  
Wrap -Up.   
  
 
 
   
Page 12 of 15 
 Attendance Policy  
 
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students 
are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about excused absences, including 
definitions, and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Makeup Work Policy  
 
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance 
contributes to a s tudent’s grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed 
appropriate by the instructor.  
 
Please refer to Student Rule 7  in its entirety for information about makeup work, inclu ding definitions, 
and related documentation and timelines.  
 
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more 
than 30 days for make -up work, and the timeframe for make -up work should be agreed upon by the 
student and instructor” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1 ). 
 
“The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed 
because of an unexcused absence” ( Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2 ). 
 
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student 
Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24 .) 
 
Academic Integrity Statement and Policy  
 
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.”  
 
“Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If 
asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that 
student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one’s work, 
should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to  initiate an academic misconduct case” 
(Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20 ). 
 
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic int egrity, and 
your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu . 
 
NOTE : Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this Academic Integrity 
Statement and Policy. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language and location 
at their site.  
  
Page 13 of 15 
 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all 
students. If you experience barrier s to your education due to a disability or think you may have a 
disability, please contact Disability Resources in the Student Services Building or at (979) 845 -1637 or 
visit disability.tamu.edu . Disabilities ma y include, but are not limited to attentional, learning, mental 
health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their 
disability related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possib le. 
 
NOTE : Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this Americans with 
Disabilities Act Policy statement. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language 
and location at their site.  
 
Title IX and Statement o n Limits to Confidentiality  
 
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for 
all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit gender -based discrimination and sexual 
harassment, including sex ual assault, sexual exploitation, domestic violence, dating violence, and 
stalking.  
 
With the exception of some medical and mental health providers, all university employees (including full 
and part -time faculty, staff, paid graduate assistants, student wo rkers, etc.) are Mandatory Reporters 
and must report to the Title IX Office if the employee experiences, observes, or becomes aware of an 
incident that meets the following conditions (see University Rule 08.01.01.M1 ): 
 
• The incident is reasonably believed to be discrimination or harassment.  
• The incident is alleged to have been committed by or against a person who, at the time of the 
incident, was (1) a student enrolled at the University or (2)  an employee of the University.  
 
Mandatory Reporters must file a report regardless of how the information comes to their attention – 
including but not limited to face -to-face conversations, a written In-Class Work  or paper, class 
discussion, email, text, or social media post. Although Mandatory Reporters must file a report, in most 
instances, you will be able to control how the report is handled, including whether or not to pursue a 
formal investigation. The University’s goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options 
available to you and to ensure access to the resources you need.  
 
Students wishing to discuss concerns in a confidential setting are encouraged to make an appointment 
with Counseling and Psycho logical Services  (CAPS).  
 
Students can learn more about filing a report, accessing supportive resources, and navigating the Title IX 
investigation and resolution process on the University’s Title IX webpage . 
 
NOTE : Faculty associated with the main campus in College Station should use this Title IX and Statement 
on Limits of Liability. Faculty not on the main campus should use the appropriate language and location 
at their site.  
  
Page 14 of 15 
 Statement on Mental Health and W ellness  
 
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors that influence a 
student’s academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in proper self -
care by utilizing the resources and services a vailable from Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS). 
Students who need someone to talk to can call the TAMU Helpline (979 -845-2700) from 4:00 p.m. to 
8:00 a.m. weekdays and 24 hours on weekends. 24 -hour emergency help is also available through the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline (800 -273-8255) or at suicidepreventionlifeline.org .  
 
COVID -19 Temporary Amendment to Minimum Syllabus Requirements  
 
Campus Safety Measures  
 
To promote public safety and protect students, faculty, and staff during the coronavirus pandemic, 
Texas A&M University has adopted policies and practices for the Spring 2021  academic term to limit 
virus transmission. Students must observe the following pr actices while participating in face -to-face 
courses and course -related activities (office hours, help sessions, transitioning to and between classes, 
study spaces, academic services, etc.):  
 
• Self-monitoring —Students should follow CDC recommendations for se lf-monitoring. Students 
who have a fever or exhibit symptoms of COVID -19 should participate in class remotely and 
should not participate in face -to-face instruction.  
• Face Coverings —Face co verings  (cloth face covering, surgical mask, etc.) must be properly worn 
in all non -private spaces including classrooms, teaching laboratories, common spaces such as 
lobbies and hallways, public study spaces, libraries, academic resource and support office s, and 
outdoor spaces where 6 feet of physical distancing is difficult to reliably maintain. Description of 
face coverings and additional guidance are provided in the Face Covering policy  and Frequently 
Asked Questions (FAQ)  available on the Provost website . 
• Physical Distancing —Physical distan cing must be maintained between students, instructors, 
andothers in course and course -related activities.  
• Classroom Ingress/Egress —Students must follow marked pathways for entering and exiting 
classrooms and other teaching spaces. Leave classrooms promptly  after course activities have 
concluded. Do not congregate in hallways and maintain 6 -foot physical distancing when waiting 
to enter classrooms and other instructional spaces.  
• To attend a face -to-face class, students must wear a face covering (or a face sh ield if they have 
an exemption letter). If a student refuses to wear a face covering, the instructor should ask the 
student to leave and join the class remotely. If the student does not leave the class, the faculty 
member should report that student to the Student Conduct office  for sanctions. Additionally, 
the faculty member may choose to teach that day’s class remotely for all students.  
 
Personal Illness and Quarantine  
 
Students req uired to quarantine must participate in courses and course -related activities remotely and 
must not attend face -to-face course activities . Students should notify their instructors of the 
quarantine requirement. Students under quarantine are expected to par ticipate in courses and 
complete graded work unless they have symptoms that are too severe to participate in course activities.  
  
Page 15 of 15 
 Absences will be excused only if the absence due to COVID (or other medical conditions) complies 
with university regulations.  
 
Students experiencing personal injury or Illness that is too severe for the student to attend class qualify 
for an excused absence (See Student Rule 7, Section 7.2.2 .) To receive an excused absence, st udents 
must comply with the documentation and notification guidelines outlined in Student Rule 7. While 
Student Rule 7, Section 7.3.2.1, indicates a medical confirmation note from the student’s medical 
provider is preferred,  
 
 