  Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
Course Name   CSCE 481: Seminar  
Term    Spring 2022  
Meeting Time   Section 5 99: TR 11:10 am – 12:25 pm ONLINE  
 
Course Description and Prerequisites  
Seminar. Credits 1.  (1 -0). 
The goal of this course is to expose students to a variety of topics of current interest in Computer Science, 
with a particular focus on leader development. Topics to be addressed include practical issues related to 
careers in the public and private  sector s, such as job seeking activities, workplace environment, and 
graduate school. Invited speakers will make presentations in a seminar format, encouraging discussion 
and exploration. This course is NO LONGER being taught to meet a formal writing requirement (i.e., this 
seminar is NOT a "W" Course).  
This course is designed for undergraduate students who are intending to graduate within 9 -21 months, 
and therefore, students will need to be either a Junior or Senior classification.  
Learning Outcomes or Course Obj ectives  
The course will cover a variety of topics in class, in addition to research topics that students will be exposed 
to through attending research seminars outside of class. The in -class topics will include:  
- Career opportunities and pathways for those with undergraduate and/or graduate degrees in 
computer science and engineering  
- Job topics, including job searching, interviewing, and negotiating  
- Company work environments  
- Computer Science/Engineering research, including undergraduate research  
- Graduate sch ool 
- Leadership and Leader Development  
Instructor Information  
Name    Ricardo Gutierrez -Osuna  
Email address   rgutier@tamu.edu   
Office hours   by appointment  
Office location   Peterson 309  
Grader    Yingying Wang  
Email address   wyytamu@tamu.edu  
  
Textbook and/or resource material  
Optional Readings:  Interesting Readings as communicated by Course Instructor  
Grading Policies  
The student’s semester grade  will be based on class attendan ce and completion of a report for each 
seminar .  Attendance will be taken via Zoom . “Online Arrival” past 11:20 am or leaving before the 
conclusion of the lecture  without  prior approval will be marked  as ABSENT.  The seminar report will be 
submitted at the conclusion of the talk. The length of the report should be at least 200 words but no 
more than 400 words . The report should include the following information:    Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 2 of 3 
 
- Name of the speaker and affiliation  
- Summary  of the talk :  
o For a com pany talk, you may  describe some of the following : (1) the in dustry sector of th e 
company and its main product s, (2) the role that computing plays at the company , (3) 
career opportunities /paths for CS/CE graduates , (4) a day in the life of a CS/CE  graduate 
at the company , (5) anything you learned about the company . 
o For a  regular talk (e.g., on a specific topic , such as artificial intelligence ), you may write a 
free-form summary  or a traditional summar y (motivation, problem  statement, proposed 
solution , results an d conclusions ), whichever  you feel is more appropriate  
- Your thoughts:   
o For a company talk, you may discuss some of the following  topics: (1) aspects of working 
at the company that you liked  the most , (2) whether or not you would like to work at this 
company, and why, (3) aspects of the presentation and Q&A that you found interesting 
or informative , (4) aspects of the presentation and Q&A that could be improved , etc.  
o For a regular talk, you may write a crit ique or discuss your thought s.  For example, is the 
work interesting and why? do you think the re sults are important? what questions would 
you ask the speaker ? do you have any eth ical co ncerns  about the t opic ? 
 
Students will also be required to complete an Ethics and Professional Responsibility module that is 
available on Canvas .  This module must be completed by May 3 , 202 2 11:59pm.  
Class attendance is essential for student success; students are required to promptly and regularly attend 
all their classes. A record of attendance will be maintained from the first week of classes through the last 
day of class , and will constitute part of the participation grade for the course.  
Absences may only be excused as defined by the Texas A&M University Student Rules available at 
http://student -rules.tamu.edu/rule07 . These absences may be made up by watching YouTube Videos 
(specific video links will be sent on the course ’s Canvas webpages ). Only two makeup opportunities will 
be provided.  Deadline to submit your reports is December 8, 2021  11:59pm.  
Grading Scale  
The gra ding scale will be based off the number of meetings a student attends divided by the total number 
of classes held. These points cannot be made up, and extra credit will not be offered.  So, if there are 14 
meetings, you can miss one class and still make an A in the class  (13/14=92 %), miss two classes and still 
make a B  (12/14=85 %), and miss three classes and still make a C  (11/14=78 %). 
 
Point grading system (out of 100 assignable points)  
A 90 - 100 points  
B 80 - 89 points  
C 70 - 79 points  
D 60 - 69 points  
F < 60 points  
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)  
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is a federal anti -discrimination statute that provides 
comprehensive civil rights protection for persons with disabilities. Among other things, this legislation   Course Syllabus  
 
 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
requires that all students with disabilities be guara nteed a learning environment that provides for 
reasonable accommodation of their disabilities. If you believe you have a disability requiring an 
accommodation, please contact Disability Services. For location, contact information, and other details, 
visit  http://disability.tamu.edu . 
Academic Integrity  
For additional information please visit:  http://aggiehonor.tamu.edu   
“An Aggie does not lie, cheat, or steal, or tolerate  those who do.”  